The book of the generation of Jesus Christ , the son of David , the son of Abraham .
Abraham begat Isaac ; and Isaac begat Jacob ; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren .
And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar ; and Phares begat Esrom ; and Esrom begat Aram .
And Aram begat Aminadab ; and Aminadab begat Naasson ; and Naasson begat Salmon .
And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab ; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth ; and Obed begat Jesse .
And Jesse begat David the king ; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias .
And Solomon begat Roboam ; and Roboam begat Abia ; and Abia begat Asa .
And Asa begat Josaphat ; and Josaphat begat Joram ; and Joram begat Ozias .
And Ozias begat Joatham ; and Joatham begat Achaz ; and Achaz begat Ezekias .
And Ezekias begat Manasses ; and Manasses begat Amon ; and Amon begat Josias .
And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren , about the time they were carried away to Babylon .
And after they were brought to Babylon , Jechonias begat Salathiel ; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel .
And Zorobabel begat Abiud ; and Abiud begat Eliakim ; and Eliakim begat Azor .
And Azor begat Sadoc ; and Sadoc begat Achim ; and Achim begat Eliud .
And Eliud begat Eleazar ; and Eleazar begat Matthan ; and Matthan begat Jacob .
And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary , of whom was born Jesus , who is called Christ .
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations ; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations ; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations .
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise : When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph , before they came together , she was found with child of the Holy Ghost .
Then Joseph her husband , being a just man , and not willing to make her a publick example , was minded to put her away privily .
But while he thought on these things , behold , the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream , saying , Joseph , thou son of David , fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife : for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost .
And she shall bring forth a son , and thou shalt call his name JESUS : for he shall save his people from their sins .
Now all this was done , that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet , saying .
Behold , a virgin shall be with child , and shall bring forth a son , and they shall call his name Emmanuel , which being interpreted is , God with us .
Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him , and took unto him his wife .
And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son : and he called his name JESUS .
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king , behold , there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem .
Saying , Where is he that is born King of the Jews ? for we have seen his star in the east , and are come to worship him .
When Herod the king had heard these things , he was troubled , and all Jerusalem with him .
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together , he demanded of them where Christ should be born .
And they said unto him , In Bethlehem of Judaea : for thus it is written by the prophet .
And thou Bethlehem , in the land of Juda , art not the least among the princes of Juda : for out of thee shall come a Governor , that shall rule my people Israel .
Then Herod , when he had privily called the wise men , enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared .
And he sent them to Bethlehem , and said , Go and search diligently for the young child ; and when ye have found him , bring me word again , that I may come and worship him also .
When they had heard the king , they departed ; and , lo , the star , which they saw in the east , went before them , till it came and stood over where the young child was .
When they saw the star , they rejoiced with exceeding great joy .
And when they were come into the house , they saw the young child with Mary his mother , and fell down , and worshipped him : and when they had opened their treasures , they presented unto him gifts ; gold , and frankincense , and myrrh .
And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod , they departed into their own country another way .
And when they were departed , behold , the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream , saying , Arise , and take the young child and his mother , and flee into Egypt , and be thou there until I bring thee word : for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him .
When he arose , he took the young child and his mother by night , and departed into Egypt .
And was there until the death of Herod : that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet , saying , Out of Egypt have I called my son .
Then Herod , when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men , was exceeding wroth , and sent forth , and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem , and in all the coasts thereof , from two years old and under , according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men .
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet , saying .
In Rama was there a voice heard , lamentation , and weeping , and great mourning , Rachel weeping for her children , and would not be comforted , because they are not .
But when Herod was dead , behold , an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt .
Saying , Arise , and take the young child and his mother , and go into the land of Israel : for they are dead which sought the young child ' s life .
And he arose , and took the young child and his mother , and came into the land of Israel .
But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod , he was afraid to go thither : notwithstanding , being warned of God in a dream , he turned aside into the parts of Galilee .
And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth : that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets , He shall be called a Nazarene .
In those days came John the Baptist , preaching in the wilderness of Judaea .
And saying , Repent ye : for the kingdom of heaven is at hand .
For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias , saying , The voice of one crying in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way of the Lord , make his paths straight .
And the same John had his raiment of camel ' s hair , and a leathern girdle about his loins ; and his meat was locusts and wild honey .
Then went out to him Jerusalem , and all Judaea , and all the region round about Jordan .
And were baptized of him in Jordan , confessing their sins .
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism , he said unto them , O generation of vipers , who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come ?
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance .
And think not to say within yourselves , We have Abraham to our father : for I say unto you , that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham .
And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees : therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down , and cast into the fire .
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance : but he that cometh after me is mightier than I , whose shoes I am not worthy to bear : he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost , and with fire .
Whose fan is in his hand , and he will throughly purge his floor , and gather his wheat into the garner ; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire .
Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John , to be baptized of him .
But John forbad him , saying , I have need to be baptized of thee , and comest thou to me ?
And Jesus answering said unto him , Suffer it to be so now : for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness . Then he suffered him .
And Jesus , when he was baptized , went up straightway out of the water : and , lo , the heavens were opened unto him , and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove , and lighting upon him .
And lo a voice from heaven , saying , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased .
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil .
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights , he was afterward an hungred .
And when the tempter came to him , he said , If thou be the Son of God , command that these stones be made bread .
But he answered and said , It is written , Man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God .
Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city , and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple .
And saith unto him , If thou be the Son of God , cast thyself down : for it is written , He shall give his angels charge concerning thee : and in their hands they shall bear thee up , lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone .
Jesus said unto him , It is written again , Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God .
Again , the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain , and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world , and the glory of them .
And saith unto him , All these things will I give thee , if thou wilt fall down and worship me .
Then saith Jesus unto him , Get thee hence , Satan : for it is written , Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God , and him only shalt thou serve .
Then the devil leaveth him , and , behold , angels came and ministered unto him .
Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison , he departed into Galilee .
And leaving Nazareth , he came and dwelt in Capernaum , which is upon the sea coast , in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim .
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet , saying .
The land of Zabulon , and the land of Nephthalim , by the way of the sea , beyond Jordan , Galilee of the Gentiles .
The people which sat in darkness saw great light ; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up .
From that time Jesus began to preach , and to say , Repent : for the kingdom of heaven is at hand .
And Jesus , walking by the sea of Galilee , saw two brethren , Simon called Peter , and Andrew his brother , casting a net into the sea : for they were fishers .
And he saith unto them , Follow me , and I will make you fishers of men .
And they straightway left their nets , and followed him .
And going on from thence , he saw other two brethren , James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother , in a ship with Zebedee their father , mending their nets ; and he called them .
And they immediately left the ship and their father , and followed him .
And Jesus went about all Galilee , teaching in their synagogues , and preaching the gospel of the kingdom , and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people .
And his fame went throughout all Syria : and they brought unto him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments , and those which were possessed with devils , and those which were lunatick , and those that had the palsy ; and he healed them .
And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee , and from Decapolis , and from Jerusalem , and from Judaea , and from beyond Jordan .
And seeing the multitudes , he went up into a mountain : and when he was set , his disciples came unto him .
And he opened his mouth , and taught them , saying .
Blessed are the poor in spirit : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven .
Blessed are they that mourn : for they shall be comforted .
Blessed are the meek : for they shall inherit the earth .
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness : for they shall be filled .
Blessed are the merciful : for they shall obtain mercy .
Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God .
Blessed are the peacemakers : for they shall be called the children of God .
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness ' sake : for theirs is the kingdom of heaven .
Blessed are ye , when men shall revile you , and persecute you , and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely , for my sake .
Rejoice , and be exceeding glad : for great is your reward in heaven : for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you .
Ye are the salt of the earth : but if the salt have lost his savour , wherewith shall it be salted ? it is thenceforth good for nothing , but to be cast out , and to be trodden under foot of men .
Ye are the light of the world . A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid .
Neither do men light a candle , and put it under a bushel , but on a candlestick ; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house .
Let your light so shine before men , that they may see your good works , and glorify your Father which is in heaven .
Think not that I am come to destroy the law , or the prophets : I am not come to destroy , but to fulfil .
For verily I say unto you , Till heaven and earth pass , one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law , till all be fulfilled .
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments , and shall teach men so , he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven : but whosoever shall do and teach them , the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven .
For I say unto you , That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees , ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven .
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time , Thou shalt not kill ; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment .
But I say unto you , That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment : and whosoever shall say to his brother , Raca , shall be in danger of the council : but whosoever shall say , Thou fool , shall be in danger of hell fire .
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar , and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee .
Leave there thy gift before the altar , and go thy way ; first be reconciled to thy brother , and then come and offer thy gift .
Agree with thine adversary quickly , whiles thou art in the way with him ; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge , and the judge deliver thee to the officer , and thou be cast into prison .
Verily I say unto thee , Thou shalt by no means come out thence , till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing .
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time , Thou shalt not commit adultery .
But I say unto you , That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart .
And if thy right eye offend thee , pluck it out , and cast it from thee : for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish , and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell .
And if thy right hand offend thee , cut it off , and cast it from thee : for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish , and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell .
It hath been said , Whosoever shall put away his wife , let him give her a writing of divorcement .
But I say unto you , That whosoever shall put away his wife , saving for the cause of fornication , causeth her to commit adultery : and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery .
Again , ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time , Thou shalt not forswear thyself , but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths .
But I say unto you , Swear not at all ; neither by heaven ; for it is God ' s throne .
Nor by the earth ; for it is his footstool : neither by Jerusalem ; for it is the city of the great King .
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head , because thou canst not make one hair white or black .
But let your communication be , Yea , yea ; Nay , nay : for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil .
Ye have heard that it hath been said , An eye for an eye , and a tooth for a tooth .
But I say unto you , That ye resist not evil : but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek , turn to him the other also .
And if any man will sue thee at the law , and take away thy coat , let him have thy cloke also .
And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile , go with him twain .
Give to him that asketh thee , and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away .
Ye have heard that it hath been said , Thou shalt love thy neighbour , and hate thine enemy .
But I say unto you , Love your enemies , bless them that curse you , do good to them that hate you , and pray for them which despitefully use you , and persecute you .
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven : for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good , and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust .
For if ye love them which love you , what reward have ye ? do not even the publicans the same ?
And if ye salute your brethren only , what do ye more than others ? do not even the publicans so ?
Be ye therefore perfect , even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect .
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men , to be seen of them : otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven .
Therefore when thou doest thine alms , do not sound a trumpet before thee , as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets , that they may have glory of men . Verily I say unto you , They have their reward .
But when thou doest alms , let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth .
That thine alms may be in secret : and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly .
And when thou prayest , thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are : for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets , that they may be seen of men . Verily I say unto you , They have their reward .
But thou , when thou prayest , enter into thy closet , and when thou hast shut thy door , pray to thy Father which is in secret ; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly .
But when ye pray , use not vain repetitions , as the heathen do : for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking .
Be not ye therefore like unto them : for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of , before ye ask him .
After this manner therefore pray ye : Our Father which art in heaven , Hallowed be thy name .
Thy kingdom come . Thy will be done in earth , as it is in heaven .
Give us this day our daily bread .
And forgive us our debts , as we forgive our debtors .
And lead us not into temptation , but deliver us from evil : For thine is the kingdom , and the power , and the glory , for ever . Amen .
For if ye forgive men their trespasses , your heavenly Father will also forgive you .
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses , neither will your Father forgive your trespasses .
Moreover when ye fast , be not , as the hypocrites , of a sad countenance : for they disfigure their faces , that they may appear unto men to fast . Verily I say unto you , They have their reward .
But thou , when thou fastest , anoint thine head , and wash thy face .
That thou appear not unto men to fast , but unto thy Father which is in secret : and thy Father , which seeth in secret , shall reward thee openly .
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth , where moth and rust doth corrupt , and where thieves break through and steal .
But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven , where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt , and where thieves do not break through nor steal .
For where your treasure is , there will your heart be also .
The light of the body is the eye : if therefore thine eye be single , thy whole body shall be full of light .
But if thine eye be evil , thy whole body shall be full of darkness . If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness , how great is that darkness !
No man can serve two masters : for either he will hate the one , and love the other ; or else he will hold to the one , and despise the other . Ye cannot serve God and mammon .
Therefore I say unto you , Take no thought for your life , what ye shall eat , or what ye shall drink ; nor yet for your body , what ye shall put on . Is not the life more than meat , and the body than raiment ?
Behold the fowls of the air : for they sow not , neither do they reap , nor gather into barns ; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them . Are ye not much better than they ?
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature ?
And why take ye thought for raiment ? Consider the lilies of the field , how they grow ; they toil not , neither do they spin .
And yet I say unto you , That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these .
Wherefore , if God so clothe the grass of the field , which to day is , and to morrow is cast into the oven , shall he not much more clothe you , O ye of little faith ?
Therefore take no thought , saying , What shall we eat ? or , What shall we drink ? or , Wherewithal shall we be clothed ?
( For after all these things do the Gentiles seek : ) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things .
But seek ye first the kingdom of God , and his righteousness ; and all these things shall be added unto you .
Take therefore no thought for the morrow : for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself . Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof .
Judge not , that ye be not judged .
For with what judgment ye judge , ye shall be judged : and with what measure ye mete , it shall be measured to you again .
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother ' s eye , but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye ?
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother , Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye ; and , behold , a beam is in thine own eye ?
Thou hypocrite , first cast out the beam out of thine own eye ; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother ' s eye .
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs , neither cast ye your pearls before swine , lest they trample them under their feet , and turn again and rend you .
Ask , and it shall be given you ; seek , and ye shall find ; knock , and it shall be opened unto you .
For every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth ; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened .
Or what man is there of you , whom if his son ask bread , will he give him a stone ?
Or if he ask a fish , will he give him a serpent ?
If ye then , being evil , know how to give good gifts unto your children , how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him ?
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you , do ye even so to them : for this is the law and the prophets .
Enter ye in at the strait gate : for wide is the gate , and broad is the way , that leadeth to destruction , and many there be which go in thereat .
Because strait is the gate , and narrow is the way , which leadeth unto life , and few there be that find it .
Beware of false prophets , which come to you in sheep ' s clothing , but inwardly they are ravening wolves .
Ye shall know them by their fruits . Do men gather grapes of thorns , or figs of thistles ?
Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit ; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit .
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit , neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit .
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down , and cast into the fire .
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them .
Not every one that saith unto me , Lord , Lord , shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven .
Many will say to me in that day , Lord , Lord , have we not prophesied in thy name ? and in thy name have cast out devils ? and in thy name done many wonderful works ?
And then will I profess unto them , I never knew you : depart from me , ye that work iniquity .
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine , and doeth them , I will liken him unto a wise man , which built his house upon a rock .
And the rain descended , and the floods came , and the winds blew , and beat upon that house ; and it fell not : for it was founded upon a rock .
And every one that heareth these sayings of mine , and doeth them not , shall be likened unto a foolish man , which built his house upon the sand .
And the rain descended , and the floods came , and the winds blew , and beat upon that house ; and it fell : and great was the fall of it .
And it came to pass , when Jesus had ended these sayings , the people were astonished at his doctrine .
For he taught them as one having authority , and not as the scribes .
When he was come down from the mountain , great multitudes followed him .
And , behold , there came a leper and worshipped him , saying , Lord , if thou wilt , thou canst make me clean .
And Jesus put forth his hand , and touched him , saying , I will ; be thou clean . And immediately his leprosy was cleansed .
And Jesus saith unto him , See thou tell no man ; but go thy way , shew thyself to the priest , and offer the gift that Moses commanded , for a testimony unto them .
And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum , there came unto him a centurion , beseeching him .
And saying , Lord , my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy , grievously tormented .
And Jesus saith unto him , I will come and heal him .
The centurion answered and said , Lord , I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof : but speak the word only , and my servant shall be healed .
For I am a man under authority , having soldiers under me : and I say to this man , Go , and he goeth ; and to another , Come , and he cometh ; and to my servant , Do this , and he doeth it .
When Jesus heard it , he marvelled , and said to them that followed , Verily I say unto you , I have not found so great faith , no , not in Israel .
And I say unto you , That many shall come from the east and west , and shall sit down with Abraham , and Isaac , and Jacob , in the kingdom of heaven .
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness : there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth .
And Jesus said unto the centurion , Go thy way ; and as thou hast believed , so be it done unto thee . And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour .
And when Jesus was come into Peter ' s house , he saw his wife ' s mother laid , and sick of a fever .
And he touched her hand , and the fever left her : and she arose , and ministered unto them .
When the even was come , they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils : and he cast out the spirits with his word , and healed all that were sick .
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet , saying , Himself took our infirmities , and bare our sicknesses .
Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him , he gave commandment to depart unto the other side .
And a certain scribe came , and said unto him , Master , I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest .
And Jesus saith unto him , The foxes have holes , and the birds of the air have nests ; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head .
And another of his disciples said unto him , Lord , suffer me first to go and bury my father .
But Jesus said unto him , Follow me ; and let the dead bury their dead .
And when he was entered into a ship , his disciples followed him .
And , behold , there arose a great tempest in the sea , insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves : but he was asleep .
And his disciples came to him , and awoke him , saying , Lord , save us : we perish .
And he saith unto them , Why are ye fearful , O ye of little faith ? Then he arose , and rebuked the winds and the sea ; and there was a great calm .
But the men marvelled , saying , What manner of man is this , that even the winds and the sea obey him !
And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes , there met him two possessed with devils , coming out of the tombs , exceeding fierce , so that no man might pass by that way .
And , behold , they cried out , saying , What have we to do with thee , Jesus , thou Son of God ? art thou come hither to torment us before the time ?
And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding .
So the devils besought him , saying , If thou cast us out , suffer us to go away into the herd of swine .
And he said unto them , Go . And when they were come out , they went into the herd of swine : and , behold , the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea , and perished in the waters .
And they that kept them fled , and went their ways into the city , and told every thing , and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils .
And , behold , the whole city came out to meet Jesus : and when they saw him , they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts .
And he entered into a ship , and passed over , and came into his own city .
And , behold , they brought to him a man sick of the palsy , lying on a bed : and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy ; Son , be of good cheer ; thy sins be forgiven thee .
And , behold , certain of the scribes said within themselves , This man blasphemeth .
And Jesus knowing their thoughts said , Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts ?
For whether is easier , to say , Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or to say , Arise , and walk ?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins , ( then saith he to the sick of the palsy , ) Arise , take up thy bed , and go unto thine house .
And he arose , and departed to his house .
But when the multitudes saw it , they marvelled , and glorified God , which had given such power unto men .
And as Jesus passed forth from thence , he saw a man , named Matthew , sitting at the receipt of custom : and he saith unto him , Follow me . And he arose , and followed him .
And it came to pass , as Jesus sat at meat in the house , behold , many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples .
And when the Pharisees saw it , they said unto his disciples , Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners ?
But when Jesus heard that , he said unto them , They that be whole need not a physician , but they that are sick .
But go ye and learn what that meaneth , I will have mercy , and not sacrifice : for I am not come to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance .
Then came to him the disciples of John , saying , Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft , but thy disciples fast not ?
And Jesus said unto them , Can the children of the bridechamber mourn , as long as the bridegroom is with them ? but the days will come , when the bridegroom shall be taken from them , and then shall they fast .
No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment , for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment , and the rent is made worse .
Neither do men put new wine into old bottles : else the bottles break , and the wine runneth out , and the bottles perish : but they put new wine into new bottles , and both are preserved .
While he spake these things unto them , behold , there came a certain ruler , and worshipped him , saying , My daughter is even now dead : but come and lay thy hand upon her , and she shall live .
And Jesus arose , and followed him , and so did his disciples .
And , behold , a woman , which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years , came behind him , and touched the hem of his garment .
For she said within herself , If I may but touch his garment , I shall be whole .
But Jesus turned him about , and when he saw her , he said , Daughter , be of good comfort ; thy faith hath made thee whole . And the woman was made whole from that hour .
And when Jesus came into the ruler ' s house , and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise .
He said unto them , Give place : for the maid is not dead , but sleepeth . And they laughed him to scorn .
But when the people were put forth , he went in , and took her by the hand , and the maid arose .
And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land .
And when Jesus departed thence , two blind men followed him , crying , and saying , Thou Son of David , have mercy on us .
And when he was come into the house , the blind men came to him : and Jesus saith unto them , Believe ye that I am able to do this ? They said unto him , Yea , Lord .
Then touched he their eyes , saying , According to your faith be it unto you .
And their eyes were opened ; and Jesus straitly charged them , saying , See that no man know it .
But they , when they were departed , spread abroad his fame in all that country .
As they went out , behold , they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil .
And when the devil was cast out , the dumb spake : and the multitudes marvelled , saying , It was never so seen in Israel .
But the Pharisees said , He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils .
And Jesus went about all the cities and villages , teaching in their synagogues , and preaching the gospel of the kingdom , and healing every sickness and every disease among the people .
But when he saw the multitudes , he was moved with compassion on them , because they fainted , and were scattered abroad , as sheep having no shepherd .
Then saith he unto his disciples , The harvest truly is plenteous , but the labourers are few .
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest , that he will send forth labourers into his harvest .
And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples , he gave them power against unclean spirits , to cast them out , and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease .
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these ; The first , Simon , who is called Peter , and Andrew his brother ; James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother .
Philip , and Bartholomew ; Thomas , and Matthew the publican ; James the son of Alphaeus , and Lebbaeus , whose surname was Thaddaeus .
Simon the Canaanite , and Judas Iscariot , who also betrayed him .
These twelve Jesus sent forth , and commanded them , saying , Go not into the way of the Gentiles , and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not .
But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel .
And as ye go , preach , saying , The kingdom of heaven is at hand .
Heal the sick , cleanse the lepers , raise the dead , cast out devils : freely ye have received , freely give .
Provide neither gold , nor silver , nor brass in your purses .
Nor scrip for your journey , neither two coats , neither shoes , nor yet staves : for the workman is worthy of his meat .
And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter , enquire who in it is worthy ; and there abide till ye go thence .
And when ye come into an house , salute it .
And if the house be worthy , let your peace come upon it : but if it be not worthy , let your peace return to you .
And whosoever shall not receive you , nor hear your words , when ye depart out of that house or city , shake off the dust of your feet .
Verily I say unto you , It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment , than for that city .
Behold , I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves : be ye therefore wise as serpents , and harmless as doves .
But beware of men : for they will deliver you up to the councils , and they will scourge you in their synagogues .
And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake , for a testimony against them and the Gentiles .
But when they deliver you up , take no thought how or what ye shall speak : for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak .
For it is not ye that speak , but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you .
And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death , and the father the child : and the children shall rise up against their parents , and cause them to be put to death .
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name ' s sake : but he that endureth to the end shall be saved .
But when they persecute you in this city , flee ye into another : for verily I say unto you , Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel , till the Son of man be come .
The disciple is not above his master , nor the servant above his lord .
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master , and the servant as his lord . If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub , how much more shall they call them of his household ?
Fear them not therefore : for there is nothing covered , that shall not be revealed ; and hid , that shall not be known .
What I tell you in darkness , that speak ye in light : and what ye hear in the ear , that preach ye upon the housetops .
And fear not them which kill the body , but are not able to kill the soul : but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell .
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father .
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered .
Fear ye not therefore , ye are of more value than many sparrows .
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men , him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven .
But whosoever shall deny me before men , him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven .
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth : I came not to send peace , but a sword .
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father , and the daughter against her mother , and the daughter in law against her mother in law .
And a man ' s foes shall be they of his own household .
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me : and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me .
And he that taketh not his cross , and followeth after me , is not worthy of me .
He that findeth his life shall lose it : and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it .
He that receiveth you receiveth me , and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me .
He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet ' s reward ; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man ' s reward .
And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple , verily I say unto you , he shall in no wise lose his reward .
And it came to pass , when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples , he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities .
Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ , he sent two of his disciples .
And said unto him , Art thou he that should come , or do we look for another ?
Jesus answered and said unto them , Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and see .
The blind receive their sight , and the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , and the deaf hear , the dead are raised up , and the poor have the gospel preached to them .
And blessed is he , whosoever shall not be offended in me .
And as they departed , Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John , What went ye out into the wilderness to see ? A reed shaken with the wind ?
But what went ye out for to see ? A man clothed in soft raiment ? behold , they that wear soft clothing are in kings ' houses .
But what went ye out for to see ? A prophet ? yea , I say unto you , and more than a prophet .
For this is he , of whom it is written , Behold , I send my messenger before thy face , which shall prepare thy way before thee .
Verily I say unto you , Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist : notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he .
And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence , and the violent take it by force .
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John .
And if ye will receive it , this is Elias , which was for to come .
He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
But whereunto shall I liken this generation ? It is like unto children sitting in the markets , and calling unto their fellows .
And saying , We have piped unto you , and ye have not danced ; we have mourned unto you , and ye have not lamented .
For John came neither eating nor drinking , and they say , He hath a devil .
The Son of man came eating and drinking , and they say , Behold a man gluttonous , and a winebibber , a friend of publicans and sinners . But wisdom is justified of her children .
Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done , because they repented not .
Woe unto thee , Chorazin ! woe unto thee , Bethsaida ! for if the mighty works , which were done in you , had been done in Tyre and Sidon , they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes .
But I say unto you , It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment , than for you .
And thou , Capernaum , which art exalted unto heaven , shalt be brought down to hell : for if the mighty works , which have been done in thee , had been done in Sodom , it would have remained until this day .
But I say unto you , That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment , than for thee .
At that time Jesus answered and said , I thank thee , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent , and hast revealed them unto babes .
Even so , Father : for so it seemed good in thy sight .
All things are delivered unto me of my Father : and no man knoweth the Son , but the Father ; neither knoweth any man the Father , save the Son , and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him .
Come unto me , all ye that labour and are heavy laden , and I will give you rest .
Take my yoke upon you , and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest unto your souls .
For my yoke is easy , and my burden is light .
At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn ; and his disciples were an hungred , and began to pluck the ears of corn , and to eat .
But when the Pharisees saw it , they said unto him , Behold , thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day .
But he said unto them , Have ye not read what David did , when he was an hungred , and they that were with him .
How he entered into the house of God , and did eat the shewbread , which was not lawful for him to eat , neither for them which were with him , but only for the priests ?
Or have ye not read in the law , how that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath , and are blameless ?
But I say unto you , That in this place is one greater than the temple .
But if ye had known what this meaneth , I will have mercy , and not sacrifice , ye would not have condemned the guiltless .
For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day .
And when he was departed thence , he went into their synagogue .
And , behold , there was a man which had his hand withered . And they asked him , saying , Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days ? that they might accuse him .
And he said unto them , What man shall there be among you , that shall have one sheep , and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day , will he not lay hold on it , and lift it out ?
How much then is a man better than a sheep ? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days .
Then saith he to the man , Stretch forth thine hand . And he stretched it forth ; and it was restored whole , like as the other .
Then the Pharisees went out , and held a council against him , how they might destroy him .
But when Jesus knew it , he withdrew himself from thence : and great multitudes followed him , and he healed them all .
And charged them that they should not make him known .
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet , saying .
Behold my servant , whom I have chosen ; my beloved , in whom my soul is well pleased : I will put my spirit upon him , and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles .
He shall not strive , nor cry ; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets .
A bruised reed shall he not break , and smoking flax shall he not quench , till he send forth judgment unto victory .
And in his name shall the Gentiles trust .
Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil , blind , and dumb : and he healed him , insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw .
And all the people were amazed , and said , Is not this the son of David ?
But when the Pharisees heard it , they said , This fellow doth not cast out devils , but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils .
And Jesus knew their thoughts , and said unto them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand .
And if Satan cast out Satan , he is divided against himself ; how shall then his kingdom stand ?
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils , by whom do your children cast them out ? therefore they shall be your judges .
But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God , then the kingdom of God is come unto you .
Or else how can one enter into a strong man ' s house , and spoil his goods , except he first bind the strong man ? and then he will spoil his house .
He that is not with me is against me ; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad .
Wherefore I say unto you , All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men : but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men .
And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man , it shall be forgiven him : but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost , it shall not be forgiven him , neither in this world , neither in the world to come .
Either make the tree good , and his fruit good ; or else make the tree corrupt , and his fruit corrupt : for the tree is known by his fruit .
O generation of vipers , how can ye , being evil , speak good things ? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh .
A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things : and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things .
But I say unto you , That every idle word that men shall speak , they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment .
For by thy words thou shalt be justified , and by thy words thou shalt be condemned .
Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered , saying , Master , we would see a sign from thee .
But he answered and said unto them , An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign ; and there shall no sign be given to it , but the sign of the prophet Jonas .
For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale ' s belly ; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth .
The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation , and shall condemn it : because they repented at the preaching of Jonas ; and , behold , a greater than Jonas is here .
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation , and shall condemn it : for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and , behold , a greater than Solomon is here .
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man , he walketh through dry places , seeking rest , and findeth none .
Then he saith , I will return into my house from whence I came out ; and when he is come , he findeth it empty , swept , and garnished .
Then goeth he , and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself , and they enter in and dwell there : and the last state of that man is worse than the first . Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation .
While he yet talked to the people , behold , his mother and his brethren stood without , desiring to speak with him .
Then one said unto him , Behold , thy mother and thy brethren stand without , desiring to speak with thee .
But he answered and said unto him that told him , Who is my mother ? and who are my brethren ?
And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples , and said , Behold my mother and my brethren !
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven , the same is my brother , and sister , and mother .
The same day went Jesus out of the house , and sat by the sea side .
And great multitudes were gathered together unto him , so that he went into a ship , and sat ; and the whole multitude stood on the shore .
And he spake many things unto them in parables , saying , Behold , a sower went forth to sow .
And when he sowed , some seeds fell by the way side , and the fowls came and devoured them up .
Some fell upon stony places , where they had not much earth : and forthwith they sprung up , because they had no deepness of earth .
And when the sun was up , they were scorched ; and because they had no root , they withered away .
And some fell among thorns ; and the thorns sprung up , and choked them .
But other fell into good ground , and brought forth fruit , some an hundredfold , some sixtyfold , some thirtyfold .
Who hath ears to hear , let him hear .
And the disciples came , and said unto him , Why speakest thou unto them in parables ?
He answered and said unto them , Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven , but to them it is not given .
For whosoever hath , to him shall be given , and he shall have more abundance : but whosoever hath not , from him shall be taken away even that he hath .
Therefore speak I to them in parables : because they seeing see not ; and hearing they hear not , neither do they understand .
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias , which saith , By hearing ye shall hear , and shall not understand ; and seeing ye shall see , and shall not perceive .
For this people ' s heart is waxed gross , and their ears are dull of hearing , and their eyes they have closed ; lest at any time they should see with their eyes , and hear with their ears , and should understand with their heart , and should be converted , and I should heal them .
But blessed are your eyes , for they see : and your ears , for they hear .
For verily I say unto you , That many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see , and have not seen them ; and to hear those things which ye hear , and have not heard them .
Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower .
When any one heareth the word of the kingdom , and understandeth it not , then cometh the wicked one , and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart . This is he which received seed by the way side .
But he that received the seed into stony places , the same is he that heareth the word , and anon with joy receiveth it .
Yet hath he not root in himself , but dureth for a while : for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word , by and by he is offended .
He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word ; and the care of this world , and the deceitfulness of riches , choke the word , and he becometh unfruitful .
But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word , and understandeth it ; which also beareth fruit , and bringeth forth , some an hundredfold , some sixty , some thirty .
Another parable put he forth unto them , saying , The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field .
But while men slept , his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat , and went his way .
But when the blade was sprung up , and brought forth fruit , then appeared the tares also .
So the servants of the householder came and said unto him , Sir , didst not thou sow good seed in thy field ? from whence then hath it tares ?
He said unto them , An enemy hath done this . The servants said unto him , Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up ?
But he said , Nay ; lest while ye gather up the tares , ye root up also the wheat with them .
Let both grow together until the harvest : and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers , Gather ye together first the tares , and bind them in bundles to burn them : but gather the wheat into my barn .
Another parable put he forth unto them , saying , The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed , which a man took , and sowed in his field .
Which indeed is the least of all seeds : but when it is grown , it is the greatest among herbs , and becometh a tree , so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof .
Another parable spake he unto them ; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven , which a woman took , and hid in three measures of meal , till the whole was leavened .
All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables ; and without a parable spake he not unto them .
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet , saying , I will open my mouth in parables ; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world .
Then Jesus sent the multitude away , and went into the house : and his disciples came unto him , saying , Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field .
He answered and said unto them , He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man .
The field is the world ; the good seed are the children of the kingdom ; but the tares are the children of the wicked one .
The enemy that sowed them is the devil ; the harvest is the end of the world ; and the reapers are the angels .
As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire ; so shall it be in the end of this world .
The Son of man shall send forth his angels , and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend , and them which do iniquity .
And shall cast them into a furnace of fire : there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth .
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father . Who hath ears to hear , let him hear .
Again , the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field ; the which when a man hath found , he hideth , and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath , and buyeth that field .
Again , the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man , seeking goodly pearls .
Who , when he had found one pearl of great price , went and sold all that he had , and bought it .
Again , the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net , that was cast into the sea , and gathered of every kind .
Which , when it was full , they drew to shore , and sat down , and gathered the good into vessels , but cast the bad away .
So shall it be at the end of the world : the angels shall come forth , and sever the wicked from among the just .
And shall cast them into the furnace of fire : there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth .
Jesus saith unto them , Have ye understood all these things ? They say unto him , Yea , Lord .
Then said he unto them , Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder , which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old .
And it came to pass , that when Jesus had finished these parables , he departed thence .
And when he was come into his own country , he taught them in their synagogue , insomuch that they were astonished , and said , Whence hath this man this wisdom , and these mighty works ?
Is not this the carpenter ' s son ? is not his mother called Mary ? and his brethren , James , and Joses , and Simon , and Judas ?
And his sisters , are they not all with us ? Whence then hath this man all these things ?
And they were offended in him . But Jesus said unto them , A prophet is not without honour , save in his own country , and in his own house .
And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief .
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus .
And said unto his servants , This is John the Baptist ; he is risen from the dead ; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him .
For Herod had laid hold on John , and bound him , and put him in prison for Herodias ' sake , his brother Philip ' s wife .
For John said unto him , It is not lawful for thee to have her .
And when he would have put him to death , he feared the multitude , because they counted him as a prophet .
But when Herod ' s birthday was kept , the daughter of Herodias danced before them , and pleased Herod .
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask .
And she , being before instructed of her mother , said , Give me here John Baptist ' s head in a charger .
And the king was sorry : nevertheless for the oath ' s sake , and them which sat with him at meat , he commanded it to be given her .
And he sent , and beheaded John in the prison .
And his head was brought in a charger , and given to the damsel : and she brought it to her mother .
And his disciples came , and took up the body , and buried it , and went and told Jesus .
When Jesus heard of it , he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart : and when the people had heard thereof , they followed him on foot out of the cities .
And Jesus went forth , and saw a great multitude , and was moved with compassion toward them , and he healed their sick .
And when it was evening , his disciples came to him , saying , This is a desert place , and the time is now past ; send the multitude away , that they may go into the villages , and buy themselves victuals .
But Jesus said unto them , They need not depart ; give ye them to eat .
And they say unto him , We have here but five loaves , and two fishes .
He said , Bring them hither to me .
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass , and took the five loaves , and the two fishes , and looking up to heaven , he blessed , and brake , and gave the loaves to his disciples , and the disciples to the multitude .
And they did all eat , and were filled : and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full .
And they that had eaten were about five thousand men , beside women and children .
And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship , and to go before him unto the other side , while he sent the multitudes away .
And when he had sent the multitudes away , he went up into a mountain apart to pray : and when the evening was come , he was there alone .
But the ship was now in the midst of the sea , tossed with waves : for the wind was contrary .
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them , walking on the sea .
And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea , they were troubled , saying , It is a spirit ; and they cried out for fear .
But straightway Jesus spake unto them , saying , Be of good cheer ; it is I ; be not afraid .
And Peter answered him and said , Lord , if it be thou , bid me come unto thee on the water .
And he said , Come . And when Peter was come down out of the ship , he walked on the water , to go to Jesus .
But when he saw the wind boisterous , he was afraid ; and beginning to sink , he cried , saying , Lord , save me .
And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand , and caught him , and said unto him , O thou of little faith , wherefore didst thou doubt ?
And when they were come into the ship , the wind ceased .
Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him , saying , Of a truth thou art the Son of God .
And when they were gone over , they came into the land of Gennesaret .
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him , they sent out into all that country round about , and brought unto him all that were diseased .
And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment : and as many as touched were made perfectly whole .
Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees , which were of Jerusalem , saying .
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders ? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread .
But he answered and said unto them , Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition ?
For God commanded , saying , Honour thy father and mother : and , He that curseth father or mother , let him die the death .
But ye say , Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother , It is a gift , by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me .
And honour not his father or his mother , he shall be free . Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition .
Ye hypocrites , well did Esaias prophesy of you , saying .
This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth , and honoureth me with their lips ; but their heart is far from me .
But in vain they do worship me , teaching for doctrines the commandments of men .
And he called the multitude , and said unto them , Hear , and understand .
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man ; but that which cometh out of the mouth , this defileth a man .
Then came his disciples , and said unto him , Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended , after they heard this saying ?
But he answered and said , Every plant , which my heavenly Father hath not planted , shall be rooted up .
Let them alone : they be blind leaders of the blind . And if the blind lead the blind , both shall fall into the ditch .
Then answered Peter and said unto him , Declare unto us this parable .
And Jesus said , Are ye also yet without understanding ?
Do not ye yet understand , that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly , and is cast out into the draught ?
But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart ; and they defile the man .
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts , murders , adulteries , fornications , thefts , false witness , blasphemies .
These are the things which defile a man : but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man .
Then Jesus went thence , and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon .
And , behold , a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts , and cried unto him , saying , Have mercy on me , O Lord , thou Son of David ; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil .
But he answered her not a word . And his disciples came and besought him , saying , Send her away ; for she crieth after us .
But he answered and said , I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel .
Then came she and worshipped him , saying , Lord , help me .
But he answered and said , It is not meet to take the children ' s bread , and to cast it to dogs .
And she said , Truth , Lord : yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters ' table .
Then Jesus answered and said unto her , O woman , great is thy faith : be it unto thee even as thou wilt . And her daughter was made whole from that very hour .
And Jesus departed from thence , and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee ; and went up into a mountain , and sat down there .
And great multitudes came unto him , having with them those that were lame , blind , dumb , maimed , and many others , and cast them down at Jesus ' feet ; and he healed them .
Insomuch that the multitude wondered , when they saw the dumb to speak , the maimed to be whole , the lame to walk , and the blind to see : and they glorified the God of Israel .
Then Jesus called his disciples unto him , and said , I have compassion on the multitude , because they continue with me now three days , and have nothing to eat : and I will not send them away fasting , lest they faint in the way .
And his disciples say unto him , Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness , as to fill so great a multitude ?
And Jesus saith unto them , How many loaves have ye ? And they said , Seven , and a few little fishes .
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground .
And he took the seven loaves and the fishes , and gave thanks , and brake them , and gave to his disciples , and the disciples to the multitude .
And they did all eat , and were filled : and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets full .
And they that did eat were four thousand men , beside women and children .
And he sent away the multitude , and took ship , and came into the coasts of Magdala .
The Pharisees also with the Sadducees came , and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven .
He answered and said unto them , When it is evening , ye say , It will be fair weather : for the sky is red .
And in the morning , It will be foul weather to day : for the sky is red and lowring . O ye hypocrites , ye can discern the face of the sky ; but can ye not discern the signs of the times ?
A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign ; and there shall no sign be given unto it , but the sign of the prophet Jonas . And he left them , and departed .
And when his disciples were come to the other side , they had forgotten to take bread .
Then Jesus said unto them , Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees .
And they reasoned among themselves , saying , It is because we have taken no bread .
Which when Jesus perceived , he said unto them , O ye of little faith , why reason ye among yourselves , because ye have brought no bread ?
Do ye not yet understand , neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand , and how many baskets ye took up ?
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand , and how many baskets ye took up ?
How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread , that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees ?
Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread , but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees .
When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi , he asked his disciples , saying , Whom do men say that I the Son of man am ?
And they said , Some say that thou art John the Baptist : some , Elias ; and others , Jeremias , or one of the prophets .
He saith unto them , But whom say ye that I am ?
And Simon Peter answered and said , Thou art the Christ , the Son of the living God .
And Jesus answered and said unto him , Blessed art thou , Simon Bar - jona : for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee , but my Father which is in heaven .
And I say also unto thee , That thou art Peter , and upon this rock I will build my church ; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it .
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven .
Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ .
From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples , how that he must go unto Jerusalem , and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes , and be killed , and be raised again the third day .
Then Peter took him , and began to rebuke him , saying , Be it far from thee , Lord : this shall not be unto thee .
But he turned , and said unto Peter , Get thee behind me , Satan : thou art an offence unto me : for thou savourest not the things that be of God , but those that be of men .
Then said Jesus unto his disciples , If any man will come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross , and follow me .
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it : and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it .
For what is a man profited , if he shall gain the whole world , and lose his own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ?
For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels ; and then he shall reward every man according to his works .
Verily I say unto you , There be some standing here , which shall not taste of death , till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom .
And after six days Jesus taketh Peter , James , and John his brother , and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart .
And was transfigured before them : and his face did shine as the sun , and his raiment was white as the light .
And , behold , there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him .
Then answered Peter , and said unto Jesus , Lord , it is good for us to be here : if thou wilt , let us make here three tabernacles ; one for thee , and one for Moses , and one for Elias .
While he yet spake , behold , a bright cloud overshadowed them : and behold a voice out of the cloud , which said , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased ; hear ye him .
And when the disciples heard it , they fell on their face , and were sore afraid .
And Jesus came and touched them , and said , Arise , and be not afraid .
And when they had lifted up their eyes , they saw no man , save Jesus only .
And as they came down from the mountain , Jesus charged them , saying , Tell the vision to no man , until the Son of man be risen again from the dead .
And his disciples asked him , saying , Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come ?
And Jesus answered and said unto them , Elias truly shall first come , and restore all things .
But I say unto you , That Elias is come already , and they knew him not , but have done unto him whatsoever they listed . Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them .
Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist .
And when they were come to the multitude , there came to him a certain man , kneeling down to him , and saying .
Lord , have mercy on my son : for he is lunatick , and sore vexed : for ofttimes he falleth into the fire , and oft into the water .
And I brought him to thy disciples , and they could not cure him .
Then Jesus answered and said , O faithless and perverse generation , how long shall I be with you ? how long shall I suffer you ? bring him hither to me .
And Jesus rebuked the devil ; and he departed out of him : and the child was cured from that very hour .
Then came the disciples to Jesus apart , and said , Why could not we cast him out ?
And Jesus said unto them , Because of your unbelief : for verily I say unto you , If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed , ye shall say unto this mountain , Remove hence to yonder place ; and it shall remove ; and nothing shall be impossible unto you .
Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting .
And while they abode in Galilee , Jesus said unto them , The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men .
And they shall kill him , and the third day he shall be raised again . And they were exceeding sorry .
And when they were come to Capernaum , they that received tribute money came to Peter , and said , Doth not your master pay tribute ?
He saith , Yes . And when he was come into the house , Jesus prevented him , saying , What thinkest thou , Simon ? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute ? of their own children , or of strangers ?
Peter saith unto him , Of strangers . Jesus saith unto him , Then are the children free .
Notwithstanding , lest we should offend them , go thou to the sea , and cast an hook , and take up the fish that first cometh up ; and when thou hast opened his mouth , thou shalt find a piece of money : that take , and give unto them for me and thee .
At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus , saying , Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven ?
And Jesus called a little child unto him , and set him in the midst of them .
And said , Verily I say unto you , Except ye be converted , and become as little children , ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven .
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child , the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven .
And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me .
But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me , it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck , and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea .
Woe unto the world because of offences ! for it must needs be that offences come ; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh !
Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee , cut them off , and cast them from thee : it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed , rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire .
And if thine eye offend thee , pluck it out , and cast it from thee : it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye , rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire .
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones ; for I say unto you , That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven .
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost .
How think ye ? if a man have an hundred sheep , and one of them be gone astray , doth he not leave the ninety and nine , and goeth into the mountains , and seeketh that which is gone astray ?
And if so be that he find it , verily I say unto you , he rejoiceth more of that sheep , than of the ninety and nine which went not astray .
Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven , that one of these little ones should perish .
Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee , go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone : if he shall hear thee , thou hast gained thy brother .
But if he will not hear thee , then take with thee one or two more , that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established .
And if he shall neglect to hear them , tell it unto the church : but if he neglect to hear the church , let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican .
Verily I say unto you , Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven .
Again I say unto you , That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask , it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven .
For where two or three are gathered together in my name , there am I in the midst of them .
Then came Peter to him , and said , Lord , how oft shall my brother sin against me , and I forgive him ? till seven times ?
Jesus saith unto him , I say not unto thee , Until seven times : but , Until seventy times seven .
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king , which would take account of his servants .
And when he had begun to reckon , one was brought unto him , which owed him ten thousand talents .
But forasmuch as he had not to pay , his lord commanded him to be sold , and his wife , and children , and all that he had , and payment to be made .
The servant therefore fell down , and worshipped him , saying , Lord , have patience with me , and I will pay thee all .
Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion , and loosed him , and forgave him the debt .
But the same servant went out , and found one of his fellowservants , which owed him an hundred pence : and he laid hands on him , and took him by the throat , saying , Pay me that thou owest .
And his fellowservant fell down at his feet , and besought him , saying , Have patience with me , and I will pay thee all .
And he would not : but went and cast him into prison , till he should pay the debt .
So when his fellowservants saw what was done , they were very sorry , and came and told unto their lord all that was done .
Then his lord , after that he had called him , said unto him , O thou wicked servant , I forgave thee all that debt , because thou desiredst me .
Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant , even as I had pity on thee ?
And his lord was wroth , and delivered him to the tormentors , till he should pay all that was due unto him .
So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you , if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses .
And it came to pass , that when Jesus had finished these sayings , he departed from Galilee , and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan .
And great multitudes followed him ; and he healed them there .
The Pharisees also came unto him , tempting him , and saying unto him , Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause ?
And he answered and said unto them , Have ye not read , that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female .
And said , For this cause shall a man leave father and mother , and shall cleave to his wife : and they twain shall be one flesh ?
Wherefore they are no more twain , but one flesh . What therefore God hath joined together , let not man put asunder .
They say unto him , Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement , and to put her away ?
He saith unto them , Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives : but from the beginning it was not so .
And I say unto you , Whosoever shall put away his wife , except it be for fornication , and shall marry another , committeth adultery : and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery .
His disciples say unto him , If the case of the man be so with his wife , it is not good to marry .
But he said unto them , All men cannot receive this saying , save they to whom it is given .
For there are some eunuchs , which were so born from their mother ' s womb : and there are some eunuchs , which were made eunuchs of men : and there be eunuchs , which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven ' s sake . He that is able to receive it , let him receive it .
Then were there brought unto him little children , that he should put his hands on them , and pray : and the disciples rebuked them .
But Jesus said , Suffer little children , and forbid them not , to come unto me : for of such is the kingdom of heaven .
And he laid his hands on them , and departed thence .
And , behold , one came and said unto him , Good Master , what good thing shall I do , that I may have eternal life ?
And he said unto him , Why callest thou me good ? there is none good but one , that is , God : but if thou wilt enter into life , keep the commandments .
He saith unto him , Which ? Jesus said , Thou shalt do no murder , Thou shalt not commit adultery , Thou shalt not steal , Thou shalt not bear false witness .
Honour thy father and thy mother : and , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself .
The young man saith unto him , All these things have I kept from my youth up : what lack I yet ?
Jesus said unto him , If thou wilt be perfect , go and sell that thou hast , and give to the poor , and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come and follow me .
But when the young man heard that saying , he went away sorrowful : for he had great possessions .
Then said Jesus unto his disciples , Verily I say unto you , That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven .
And again I say unto you , It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God .
When his disciples heard it , they were exceedingly amazed , saying , Who then can be saved ?
But Jesus beheld them , and said unto them , With men this is impossible ; but with God all things are possible .
Then answered Peter and said unto him , Behold , we have forsaken all , and followed thee ; what shall we have therefore ?
And Jesus said unto them , Verily I say unto you , That ye which have followed me , in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory , ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel .
And every one that hath forsaken houses , or brethren , or sisters , or father , or mother , or wife , or children , or lands , for my name ' s sake , shall receive an hundredfold , and shall inherit everlasting life .
But many that are first shall be last ; and the last shall be first .
For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder , which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard .
And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day , he sent them into his vineyard .
And he went out about the third hour , and saw others standing idle in the marketplace .
And said unto them ; Go ye also into the vineyard , and whatsoever is right I will give you . And they went their way .
Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour , and did likewise .
And about the eleventh hour he went out , and found others standing idle , and saith unto them , Why stand ye here all the day idle ?
They say unto him , Because no man hath hired us . He saith unto them , Go ye also into the vineyard ; and whatsoever is right , that shall ye receive .
So when even was come , the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward , Call the labourers , and give them their hire , beginning from the last unto the first .
And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour , they received every man a penny .
But when the first came , they supposed that they should have received more ; and they likewise received every man a penny .
And when they had received it , they murmured against the goodman of the house .
Saying , These last have wrought but one hour , and thou hast made them equal unto us , which have borne the burden and heat of the day .
But he answered one of them , and said , Friend , I do thee no wrong : didst not thou agree with me for a penny ?
Take that thine is , and go thy way : I will give unto this last , even as unto thee .
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own ? Is thine eye evil , because I am good ?
So the last shall be first , and the first last : for many be called , but few chosen .
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way , and said unto them .
Behold , we go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes , and they shall condemn him to death .
And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock , and to scourge , and to crucify him : and the third day he shall rise again .
Then came to him the mother of Zebedee ' s children with her sons , worshipping him , and desiring a certain thing of him .
And he said unto her , What wilt thou ? She saith unto him , Grant that these my two sons may sit , the one on thy right hand , and the other on the left , in thy kingdom .
But Jesus answered and said , Ye know not what ye ask . Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of , and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ? They say unto him , We are able .
And he saith unto them , Ye shall drink indeed of my cup , and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with : but to sit on my right hand , and on my left , is not mine to give , but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father .
And when the ten heard it , they were moved with indignation against the two brethren .
But Jesus called them unto him , and said , Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them , and they that are great exercise authority upon them .
But it shall not be so among you : but whosoever will be great among you , let him be your minister .
And whosoever will be chief among you , let him be your servant .
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto , but to minister , and to give his life a ransom for many .
And as they departed from Jericho , a great multitude followed him .
And , behold , two blind men sitting by the way side , when they heard that Jesus passed by , cried out , saying , Have mercy on us , O Lord , thou Son of David .
And the multitude rebuked them , because they should hold their peace : but they cried the more , saying , Have mercy on us , O Lord , thou Son of David .
And Jesus stood still , and called them , and said , What will ye that I shall do unto you ?
They say unto him , Lord , that our eyes may be opened .
So Jesus had compassion on them , and touched their eyes : and immediately their eyes received sight , and they followed him .
And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem , and were come to Bethphage , unto the mount of Olives , then sent Jesus two disciples .
Saying unto them , Go into the village over against you , and straightway ye shall find an ass tied , and a colt with her : loose them , and bring them unto me .
And if any man say ought unto you , ye shall say , The Lord hath need of them ; and straightway he will send them .
All this was done , that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet , saying .
Tell ye the daughter of Sion , Behold , thy King cometh unto thee , meek , and sitting upon an ass , and a colt the foal of an ass .
And the disciples went , and did as Jesus commanded them .
And brought the ass , and the colt , and put on them their clothes , and they set him thereon .
And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way ; others cut down branches from the trees , and strawed them in the way .
And the multitudes that went before , and that followed , cried , saying , Hosanna to the Son of David : Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord ; Hosanna in the highest .
And when he was come into Jerusalem , all the city was moved , saying , Who is this ?
And the multitude said , This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee .
And Jesus went into the temple of God , and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple , and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers , and the seats of them that sold doves .
And said unto them , It is written , My house shall be called the house of prayer ; but ye have made it a den of thieves .
And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple ; and he healed them .
And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did , and the children crying in the temple , and saying , Hosanna to the Son of David ; they were sore displeased .
And said unto him , Hearest thou what these say ? And Jesus saith unto them , Yea ; have ye never read , Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise ?
And he left them , and went out of the city into Bethany ; and he lodged there .
Now in the morning as he returned into the city , he hungered .
And when he saw a fig tree in the way , he came to it , and found nothing thereon , but leaves only , and said unto it , Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever . And presently the fig tree withered away .
And when the disciples saw it , they marvelled , saying , How soon is the fig tree withered away !
Jesus answered and said unto them , Verily I say unto you , If ye have faith , and doubt not , ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree , but also if ye shall say unto this mountain , Be thou removed , and be thou cast into the sea ; it shall be done .
And all things , whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer , believing , ye shall receive .
And when he was come into the temple , the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching , and said , By what authority doest thou these things ? and who gave thee this authority ?
And Jesus answered and said unto them , I also will ask you one thing , which if ye tell me , I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things .
The baptism of John , whence was it ? from heaven , or of men ? And they reasoned with themselves , saying , If we shall say , From heaven ; he will say unto us , Why did ye not then believe him ?
But if we shall say , Of men ; we fear the people ; for all hold John as a prophet .
And they answered Jesus , and said , We cannot tell . And he said unto them , Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things .
But what think ye ? A certain man had two sons ; and he came to the first , and said , Son , go work to day in my vineyard .
He answered and said , I will not : but afterward he repented , and went .
And he came to the second , and said likewise . And he answered and said , I go , sir : and went not .
Whether of them twain did the will of his father ? They say unto him , The first . Jesus saith unto them , Verily I say unto you , That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you .
For John came unto you in the way of righteousness , and ye believed him not : but the publicans and the harlots believed him : and ye , when ye had seen it , repented not afterward , that ye might believe him .
Hear another parable : There was a certain householder , which planted a vineyard , and hedged it round about , and digged a winepress in it , and built a tower , and let it out to husbandmen , and went into a far country .
And when the time of the fruit drew near , he sent his servants to the husbandmen , that they might receive the fruits of it .
And the husbandmen took his servants , and beat one , and killed another , and stoned another .
Again , he sent other servants more than the first : and they did unto them likewise .
But last of all he sent unto them his son , saying , They will reverence my son .
But when the husbandmen saw the son , they said among themselves , This is the heir ; come , let us kill him , and let us seize on his inheritance .
And they caught him , and cast him out of the vineyard , and slew him .
When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh , what will he do unto those husbandmen ?
They say unto him , He will miserably destroy those wicked men , and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen , which shall render him the fruits in their seasons .
Jesus saith unto them , Did ye never read in the scriptures , The stone which the builders rejected , the same is become the head of the corner : this is the Lord ' s doing , and it is marvellous in our eyes ?
Therefore say I unto you , The kingdom of God shall be taken from you , and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof .
And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken : but on whomsoever it shall fall , it will grind him to powder .
And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables , they perceived that he spake of them .
But when they sought to lay hands on him , they feared the multitude , because they took him for a prophet .
And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables , and said .
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king , which made a marriage for his son .
And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding : and they would not come .
Again , he sent forth other servants , saying , Tell them which are bidden , Behold , I have prepared my dinner : my oxen and my fatlings are killed , and all things are ready : come unto the marriage .
But they made light of it , and went their ways , one to his farm , another to his merchandise .
And the remnant took his servants , and entreated them spitefully , and slew them .
But when the king heard thereof , he was wroth : and he sent forth his armies , and destroyed those murderers , and burned up their city .
Then saith he to his servants , The wedding is ready , but they which were bidden were not worthy .
Go ye therefore into the highways , and as many as ye shall find , bid to the marriage .
So those servants went out into the highways , and gathered together all as many as they found , both bad and good : and the wedding was furnished with guests .
And when the king came in to see the guests , he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment .
And he saith unto him , Friend , how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment ? And he was speechless .
Then said the king to the servants , Bind him hand and foot , and take him away , and cast him into outer darkness ; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth .
For many are called , but few are chosen .
Then went the Pharisees , and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk .
And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians , saying , Master , we know that thou art true , and teachest the way of God in truth , neither carest thou for any man : for thou regardest not the person of men .
Tell us therefore , What thinkest thou ? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar , or not ?
But Jesus perceived their wickedness , and said , Why tempt ye me , ye hypocrites ?
Shew me the tribute money . And they brought unto him a penny .
And he saith unto them , Whose is this image and superscription ?
They say unto him , Caesar ' s . Then saith he unto them , Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar ' s ; and unto God the things that are God ' s .
When they had heard these words , they marvelled , and left him , and went their way .
The same day came to him the Sadducees , which say that there is no resurrection , and asked him .
Saying , Master , Moses said , If a man die , having no children , his brother shall marry his wife , and raise up seed unto his brother .
Now there were with us seven brethren : and the first , when he had married a wife , deceased , and , having no issue , left his wife unto his brother .
Likewise the second also , and the third , unto the seventh .
And last of all the woman died also .
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven ? for they all had her .
Jesus answered and said unto them , Ye do err , not knowing the scriptures , nor the power of God .
For in the resurrection they neither marry , nor are given in marriage , but are as the angels of God in heaven .
But as touching the resurrection of the dead , have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God , saying .
I am the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob ? God is not the God of the dead , but of the living .
And when the multitude heard this , they were astonished at his doctrine .
But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence , they were gathered together .
Then one of them , which was a lawyer , asked him a question , tempting him , and saying .
Master , which is the great commandment in the law ?
Jesus said unto him , Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy mind .
This is the first and great commandment .
And the second is like unto it , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself .
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets .
While the Pharisees were gathered together , Jesus asked them .
Saying , What think ye of Christ ? whose son is he ? They say unto him , The Son of David .
He saith unto them , How then doth David in spirit call him Lord , saying .
The LORD said unto my Lord , Sit thou on my right hand , till I make thine enemies thy footstool ?
If David then call him Lord , how is he his son ?
And no man was able to answer him a word , neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions .
Then spake Jesus to the multitude , and to his disciples .
Saying , The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses ' seat .
All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe , that observe and do ; but do not ye after their works : for they say , and do not .
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne , and lay them on men ' s shoulders ; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers .
But all their works they do for to be seen of men : they make broad their phylacteries , and enlarge the borders of their garments .
And love the uppermost rooms at feasts , and the chief seats in the synagogues .
And greetings in the markets , and to be called of men , Rabbi , Rabbi .
But be not ye called Rabbi : for one is your Master , even Christ ; and all ye are brethren .
And call no man your father upon the earth : for one is your Father , which is in heaven .
Neither be ye called masters : for one is your Master , even Christ .
But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant .
And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased ; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted .
But woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men : for ye neither go in yourselves , neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye devour widows ' houses , and for a pretence make long prayer : therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte , and when he is made , ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves .
Woe unto you , ye blind guides , which say , Whosoever shall swear by the temple , it is nothing ; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple , he is a debtor !
Ye fools and blind : for whether is greater , the gold , or the temple that sanctifieth the gold ?
And , Whosoever shall swear by the altar , it is nothing ; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it , he is guilty .
Ye fools and blind : for whether is greater , the gift , or the altar that sanctifieth the gift ?
Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar , sweareth by it , and by all things thereon .
And whoso shall swear by the temple , sweareth by it , and by him that dwelleth therein .
And he that shall swear by heaven , sweareth by the throne of God , and by him that sitteth thereon .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin , and have omitted the weightier matters of the law , judgment , mercy , and faith : these ought ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone .
Ye blind guides , which strain at a gnat , and swallow a camel .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter , but within they are full of extortion and excess .
Thou blind Pharisee , cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter , that the outside of them may be clean also .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres , which indeed appear beautiful outward , but are within full of dead men ' s bones , and of all uncleanness .
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men , but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! because ye build the tombs of the prophets , and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous .
And say , If we had been in the days of our fathers , we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets .
Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves , that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets .
Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers .
Ye serpents , ye generation of vipers , how can ye escape the damnation of hell ?
Wherefore , behold , I send unto you prophets , and wise men , and scribes : and some of them ye shall kill and crucify ; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues , and persecute them from city to city .
That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth , from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias , whom ye slew between the temple and the altar .
Verily I say unto you , All these things shall come upon this generation .
O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , thou that killest the prophets , and stonest them which are sent unto thee , how often would I have gathered thy children together , even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings , and ye would not !
Behold , your house is left unto you desolate .
For I say unto you , Ye shall not see me henceforth , till ye shall say , Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord .
And Jesus went out , and departed from the temple : and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple .
And Jesus said unto them , See ye not all these things ? verily I say unto you , There shall not be left here one stone upon another , that shall not be thrown down .
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives , the disciples came unto him privately , saying , Tell us , when shall these things be ? and what shall be the sign of thy coming , and of the end of the world ?
And Jesus answered and said unto them , Take heed that no man deceive you .
For many shall come in my name , saying , I am Christ ; and shall deceive many .
And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars : see that ye be not troubled : for all these things must come to pass , but the end is not yet .
For nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom : and there shall be famines , and pestilences , and earthquakes , in divers places .
All these are the beginning of sorrows .
Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted , and shall kill you : and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name ' s sake .
And then shall many be offended , and shall betray one another , and shall hate one another .
And many false prophets shall rise , and shall deceive many .
And because iniquity shall abound , the love of many shall wax cold .
But he that shall endure unto the end , the same shall be saved .
And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations ; and then shall the end come .
When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation , spoken of by Daniel the prophet , stand in the holy place , ( whoso readeth , let him understand : )
Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains .
Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house .
Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes .
And woe unto them that are with child , and to them that give suck in those days !
But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter , neither on the sabbath day .
For then shall be great tribulation , such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time , no , nor ever shall be .
And except those days should be shortened , there should no flesh be saved : but for the elect ' s sake those days shall be shortened .
Then if any man shall say unto you , Lo , here is Christ , or there ; believe it not .
For there shall arise false Christs , and false prophets , and shall shew great signs and wonders ; insomuch that , if it were possible , they shall deceive the very elect .
Behold , I have told you before .
Wherefore if they shall say unto you , Behold , he is in the desert ; go not forth : behold , he is in the secret chambers ; believe it not .
For as the lightning cometh out of the east , and shineth even unto the west ; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be .
For wheresoever the carcase is , there will the eagles be gathered together .
Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened , and the moon shall not give her light , and the stars shall fall from heaven , and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken .
And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven : and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn , and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory .
And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet , and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds , from one end of heaven to the other .
Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; When his branch is yet tender , and putteth forth leaves , ye know that summer is nigh .
So likewise ye , when ye shall see all these things , know that it is near , even at the doors .
Verily I say unto you , This generation shall not pass , till all these things be fulfilled .
Heaven and earth shall pass away , but my words shall not pass away .
But of that day and hour knoweth no man , no , not the angels of heaven , but my Father only .
But as the days of Noe were , so shall also the coming of the Son of man be .
For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking , marrying and giving in marriage , until the day that Noe entered into the ark .
And knew not until the flood came , and took them all away ; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be .
Then shall two be in the field ; the one shall be taken , and the other left .
Two women shall be grinding at the mill ; the one shall be taken , and the other left .
Watch therefore : for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come .
But know this , that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come , he would have watched , and would not have suffered his house to be broken up .
Therefore be ye also ready : for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh .
Who then is a faithful and wise servant , whom his lord hath made ruler over his household , to give them meat in due season ?
Blessed is that servant , whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing .
Verily I say unto you , That he shall make him ruler over all his goods .
But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart , My lord delayeth his coming .
And shall begin to smite his fellowservants , and to eat and drink with the drunken .
The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him , and in an hour that he is not aware of .
And shall cut him asunder , and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites : there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth .
Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins , which took their lamps , and went forth to meet the bridegroom .
And five of them were wise , and five were foolish .
They that were foolish took their lamps , and took no oil with them .
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps .
While the bridegroom tarried , they all slumbered and slept .
And at midnight there was a cry made , Behold , the bridegroom cometh ; go ye out to meet him .
Then all those virgins arose , and trimmed their lamps .
And the foolish said unto the wise , Give us of your oil ; for our lamps are gone out .
But the wise answered , saying , Not so ; lest there be not enough for us and you : but go ye rather to them that sell , and buy for yourselves .
And while they went to buy , the bridegroom came ; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage : and the door was shut .
Afterward came also the other virgins , saying , Lord , Lord , open to us .
But he answered and said , Verily I say unto you , I know you not .
Watch therefore , for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh .
For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country , who called his own servants , and delivered unto them his goods .
And unto one he gave five talents , to another two , and to another one ; to every man according to his several ability ; and straightway took his journey .
Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same , and made them other five talents .
And likewise he that had received two , he also gained other two .
But he that had received one went and digged in the earth , and hid his lord ' s money .
After a long time the lord of those servants cometh , and reckoneth with them .
And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents , saying , Lord , thou deliveredst unto me five talents : behold , I have gained beside them five talents more .
His lord said unto him , Well done , thou good and faithful servant : thou hast been faithful over a few things , I will make thee ruler over many things : enter thou into the joy of thy lord .
He also that had received two talents came and said , Lord , thou deliveredst unto me two talents : behold , I have gained two other talents beside them .
His lord said unto him , Well done , good and faithful servant ; thou hast been faithful over a few things , I will make thee ruler over many things : enter thou into the joy of thy lord .
Then he which had received the one talent came and said , Lord , I knew thee that thou art an hard man , reaping where thou hast not sown , and gathering where thou hast not strawed .
And I was afraid , and went and hid thy talent in the earth : lo , there thou hast that is thine .
His lord answered and said unto him , Thou wicked and slothful servant , thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not , and gather where I have not strawed .
Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers , and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury .
Take therefore the talent from him , and give it unto him which hath ten talents .
For unto every one that hath shall be given , and he shall have abundance : but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath .
And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness : there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth .
When the Son of man shall come in his glory , and all the holy angels with him , then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory .
And before him shall be gathered all nations : and he shall separate them one from another , as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats .
And he shall set the sheep on his right hand , but the goats on the left .
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand , Come , ye blessed of my Father , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world .
For I was an hungred , and ye gave me meat : I was thirsty , and ye gave me drink : I was a stranger , and ye took me in .
Naked , and ye clothed me : I was sick , and ye visited me : I was in prison , and ye came unto me .
Then shall the righteous answer him , saying , Lord , when saw we thee an hungred , and fed thee ? or thirsty , and gave thee drink ?
When saw we thee a stranger , and took thee in ? or naked , and clothed thee ?
Or when saw we thee sick , or in prison , and came unto thee ?
And the King shall answer and say unto them , Verily I say unto you , Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren , ye have done it unto me .
Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand , Depart from me , ye cursed , into everlasting fire , prepared for the devil and his angels .
For I was an hungred , and ye gave me no meat : I was thirsty , and ye gave me no drink .
I was a stranger , and ye took me not in : naked , and ye clothed me not : sick , and in prison , and ye visited me not .
Then shall they also answer him , saying , Lord , when saw we thee an hungred , or athirst , or a stranger , or naked , or sick , or in prison , and did not minister unto thee ?
Then shall he answer them , saying , Verily I say unto you , Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these , ye did it not to me .
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment : but the righteous into life eternal .
And it came to pass , when Jesus had finished all these sayings , he said unto his disciples .
Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover , and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified .
Then assembled together the chief priests , and the scribes , and the elders of the people , unto the palace of the high priest , who was called Caiaphas .
And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty , and kill him .
But they said , Not on the feast day , lest there be an uproar among the people .
Now when Jesus was in Bethany , in the house of Simon the leper .
There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment , and poured it on his head , as he sat at meat .
But when his disciples saw it , they had indignation , saying , To what purpose is this waste ?
For this ointment might have been sold for much , and given to the poor .
When Jesus understood it , he said unto them , Why trouble ye the woman ? for she hath wrought a good work upon me .
For ye have the poor always with you ; but me ye have not always .
For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body , she did it for my burial .
Verily I say unto you , Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world , there shall also this , that this woman hath done , be told for a memorial of her .
Then one of the twelve , called Judas Iscariot , went unto the chief priests .
And said unto them , What will ye give me , and I will deliver him unto you ? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver .
And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him .
Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus , saying unto him , Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover ?
And he said , Go into the city to such a man , and say unto him , The Master saith , My time is at hand ; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples .
And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them ; and they made ready the passover .
Now when the even was come , he sat down with the twelve .
And as they did eat , he said , Verily I say unto you , that one of you shall betray me .
And they were exceeding sorrowful , and began every one of them to say unto him , Lord , is it I ?
And he answered and said , He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish , the same shall betray me .
The Son of man goeth as it is written of him : but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed ! it had been good for that man if he had not been born .
Then Judas , which betrayed him , answered and said , Master , is it I ? He said unto him , Thou hast said .
And as they were eating , Jesus took bread , and blessed it , and brake it , and gave it to the disciples , and said , Take , eat ; this is my body .
And he took the cup , and gave thanks , and gave it to them , saying , Drink ye all of it .
For this is my blood of the new testament , which is shed for many for the remission of sins .
But I say unto you , I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine , until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father ' s kingdom .
And when they had sung an hymn , they went out into the mount of Olives .
Then saith Jesus unto them , All ye shall be offended because of me this night : for it is written , I will smite the shepherd , and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad .
But after I am risen again , I will go before you into Galilee .
Peter answered and said unto him , Though all men shall be offended because of thee , yet will I never be offended .
Jesus said unto him , Verily I say unto thee , That this night , before the cock crow , thou shalt deny me thrice .
Peter said unto him , Though I should die with thee , yet will I not deny thee . Likewise also said all the disciples .
Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane , and saith unto the disciples , Sit ye here , while I go and pray yonder .
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee , and began to be sorrowful and very heavy .
Then saith he unto them , My soul is exceeding sorrowful , even unto death : tarry ye here , and watch with me .
And he went a little further , and fell on his face , and prayed , saying , O my Father , if it be possible , let this cup pass from me : nevertheless not as I will , but as thou wilt .
And he cometh unto the disciples , and findeth them asleep , and saith unto Peter , What , could ye not watch with me one hour ?
Watch and pray , that ye enter not into temptation : the spirit indeed is willing , but the flesh is weak .
He went away again the second time , and prayed , saying , O my Father , if this cup may not pass away from me , except I drink it , thy will be done .
And he came and found them asleep again : for their eyes were heavy .
And he left them , and went away again , and prayed the third time , saying the same words .
Then cometh he to his disciples , and saith unto them , Sleep on now , and take your rest : behold , the hour is at hand , and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .
Rise , let us be going : behold , he is at hand that doth betray me .
And while he yet spake , lo , Judas , one of the twelve , came , and with him a great multitude with swords and staves , from the chief priests and elders of the people .
Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign , saying , Whomsoever I shall kiss , that same is he : hold him fast .
And forthwith he came to Jesus , and said , Hail , master ; and kissed him .
And Jesus said unto him , Friend , wherefore art thou come ? Then came they , and laid hands on Jesus , and took him .
And , behold , one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand , and drew his sword , and struck a servant of the high priest ' s , and smote off his ear .
Then said Jesus unto him , Put up again thy sword into his place : for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword .
Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father , and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels ?
But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled , that thus it must be ?
In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes , Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me ? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple , and ye laid no hold on me .
But all this was done , that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled . Then all the disciples forsook him , and fled .
And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest , where the scribes and the elders were assembled .
But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest ' s palace , and went in , and sat with the servants , to see the end .
Now the chief priests , and elders , and all the council , sought false witness against Jesus , to put him to death .
But found none : yea , though many false witnesses came , yet found they none . At the last came two false witnesses .
And said , This fellow said , I am able to destroy the temple of God , and to build it in three days .
And the high priest arose , and said unto him , Answerest thou nothing ? what is it which these witness against thee ?
But Jesus held his peace . And the high priest answered and said unto him , I adjure thee by the living God , that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ , the Son of God .
Jesus saith unto him , Thou hast said : nevertheless I say unto you , Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power , and coming in the clouds of heaven .
Then the high priest rent his clothes , saying , He hath spoken blasphemy ; what further need have we of witnesses ? behold , now ye have heard his blasphemy .
What think ye ? They answered and said , He is guilty of death .
Then did they spit in his face , and buffeted him ; and others smote him with the palms of their hands .
Saying , Prophesy unto us , thou Christ , Who is he that smote thee ?
Now Peter sat without in the palace : and a damsel came unto him , saying , Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee .
But he denied before them all , saying , I know not what thou sayest .
And when he was gone out into the porch , another maid saw him , and said unto them that were there , This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth .
And again he denied with an oath , I do not know the man .
And after a while came unto him they that stood by , and said to Peter , Surely thou also art one of them ; for thy speech bewrayeth thee .
Then began he to curse and to swear , saying , I know not the man . And immediately the cock crew .
And Peter remembered the word of Jesus , which said unto him , Before the cock crow , thou shalt deny me thrice . And he went out , and wept bitterly .
When the morning was come , all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death .
And when they had bound him , they led him away , and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor .
Then Judas , which had betrayed him , when he saw that he was condemned , repented himself , and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders .
Saying , I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood . And they said , What is that to us ? see thou to that .
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple , and departed , and went and hanged himself .
And the chief priests took the silver pieces , and said , It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury , because it is the price of blood .
And they took counsel , and bought with them the potter ' s field , to bury strangers in .
Wherefore that field was called , The field of blood , unto this day .
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet , saying , And they took the thirty pieces of silver , the price of him that was valued , whom they of the children of Israel did value .
And gave them for the potter ' s field , as the Lord appointed me .
And Jesus stood before the governor : and the governor asked him , saying , Art thou the King of the Jews ? And Jesus said unto him , Thou sayest .
And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders , he answered nothing .
Then said Pilate unto him , Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee ?
And he answered him to never a word ; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly .
Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner , whom they would .
And they had then a notable prisoner , called Barabbas .
Therefore when they were gathered together , Pilate said unto them , Whom will ye that I release unto you ? Barabbas , or Jesus which is called Christ ?
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him .
When he was set down on the judgment seat , his wife sent unto him , saying , Have thou nothing to do with that just man : for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him .
But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas , and destroy Jesus .
The governor answered and said unto them , Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you ? They said , Barabbas .
Pilate saith unto them , What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ ? They all say unto him , Let him be crucified .
And the governor said , Why , what evil hath he done ? But they cried out the more , saying , Let him be crucified .
When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing , but that rather a tumult was made , he took water , and washed his hands before the multitude , saying , I am innocent of the blood of this just person : see ye to it .
Then answered all the people , and said , His blood be on us , and on our children .
Then released he Barabbas unto them : and when he had scourged Jesus , he delivered him to be crucified .
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall , and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers .
And they stripped him , and put on him a scarlet robe .
And when they had platted a crown of thorns , they put it upon his head , and a reed in his right hand : and they bowed the knee before him , and mocked him , saying , Hail , King of the Jews !
And they spit upon him , and took the reed , and smote him on the head .
And after that they had mocked him , they took the robe off from him , and put his own raiment on him , and led him away to crucify him .
And as they came out , they found a man of Cyrene , Simon by name : him they compelled to bear his cross .
And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha , that is to say , a place of a skull .
They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall : and when he had tasted thereof , he would not drink .
And they crucified him , and parted his garments , casting lots : that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet , They parted my garments among them , and upon my vesture did they cast lots .
And sitting down they watched him there .
And set up over his head his accusation written , THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS .
Then were there two thieves crucified with him , one on the right hand , and another on the left .
And they that passed by reviled him , wagging their heads .
And saying , Thou that destroyest the temple , and buildest it in three days , save thyself . If thou be the Son of God , come down from the cross .
Likewise also the chief priests mocking him , with the scribes and elders , said .
He saved others ; himself he cannot save . If he be the King of Israel , let him now come down from the cross , and we will believe him .
He trusted in God ; let him deliver him now , if he will have him : for he said , I am the Son of God .
The thieves also , which were crucified with him , cast the same in his teeth .
Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour .
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice , saying , Eli , Eli , lama sabachthani ? that is to say , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ?
Some of them that stood there , when they heard that , said , This man calleth for Elias .
And straightway one of them ran , and took a spunge , and filled it with vinegar , and put it on a reed , and gave him to drink .
The rest said , Let be , let us see whether Elias will come to save him .
Jesus , when he had cried again with a loud voice , yielded up the ghost .
And , behold , the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom ; and the earth did quake , and the rocks rent .
And the graves were opened ; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose .
And came out of the graves after his resurrection , and went into the holy city , and appeared unto many .
Now when the centurion , and they that were with him , watching Jesus , saw the earthquake , and those things that were done , they feared greatly , saying , Truly this was the Son of God .
And many women were there beholding afar off , which followed Jesus from Galilee , ministering unto him .
Among which was Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James and Joses , and the mother of Zebedee ' s children .
When the even was come , there came a rich man of Arimathaea , named Joseph , who also himself was Jesus ' disciple .
He went to Pilate , and begged the body of Jesus . Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered .
And when Joseph had taken the body , he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth .
And laid it in his own new tomb , which he had hewn out in the rock : and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre , and departed .
And there was Mary Magdalene , and the other Mary , sitting over against the sepulchre .
Now the next day , that followed the day of the preparation , the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate .
Saying , Sir , we remember that that deceiver said , while he was yet alive , After three days I will rise again .
Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day , lest his disciples come by night , and steal him away , and say unto the people , He is risen from the dead : so the last error shall be worse than the first .
Pilate said unto them , Ye have a watch : go your way , make it as sure as ye can .
So they went , and made the sepulchre sure , sealing the stone , and setting a watch .
In the end of the sabbath , as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week , came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre .
And , behold , there was a great earthquake : for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven , and came and rolled back the stone from the door , and sat upon it .
His countenance was like lightning , and his raiment white as snow .
And for fear of him the keepers did shake , and became as dead men .
And the angel answered and said unto the women , Fear not ye : for I know that ye seek Jesus , which was crucified .
He is not here : for he is risen , as he said . Come , see the place where the Lord lay .
And go quickly , and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead ; and , behold , he goeth before you into Galilee ; there shall ye see him : lo , I have told you .
And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy ; and did run to bring his disciples word .
And as they went to tell his disciples , behold , Jesus met them , saying , All hail . And they came and held him by the feet , and worshipped him .
Then said Jesus unto them , Be not afraid : go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee , and there shall they see me .
Now when they were going , behold , some of the watch came into the city , and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done .
And when they were assembled with the elders , and had taken counsel , they gave large money unto the soldiers .
Saying , Say ye , His disciples came by night , and stole him away while we slept .
And if this come to the governor ' s ears , we will persuade him , and secure you .
So they took the money , and did as they were taught : and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day .
Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee , into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them .
And when they saw him , they worshipped him : but some doubted .
And Jesus came and spake unto them , saying , All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth .
Go ye therefore , and teach all nations , baptizing them in the name of the Father , and of the Son , and of the Holy Ghost .
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you : and , lo , I am with you alway , even unto the end of the world . Amen .
The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ , the Son of God .
As it is written in the prophets , Behold , I send my messenger before thy face , which shall prepare thy way before thee .
The voice of one crying in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way of the Lord , make his paths straight .
John did baptize in the wilderness , and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins .
And there went out unto him all the land of Judaea , and they of Jerusalem , and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan , confessing their sins .
And John was clothed with camel ' s hair , and with a girdle of a skin about his loins ; and he did eat locusts and wild honey .
And preached , saying , There cometh one mightier than I after me , the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose .
I indeed have baptized you with water : but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost .
And it came to pass in those days , that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee , and was baptized of John in Jordan .
And straightway coming up out of the water , he saw the heavens opened , and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him .
And there came a voice from heaven , saying , Thou art my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased .
And immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness .
And he was there in the wilderness forty days , tempted of Satan ; and was with the wild beasts ; and the angels ministered unto him .
Now after that John was put in prison , Jesus came into Galilee , preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God .
And saying , The time is fulfilled , and the kingdom of God is at hand : repent ye , and believe the gospel .
Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee , he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea : for they were fishers .
And Jesus said unto them , Come ye after me , and I will make you to become fishers of men .
And straightway they forsook their nets , and followed him .
And when he had gone a little further thence , he saw James the son of Zebedee , and John his brother , who also were in the ship mending their nets .
And straightway he called them : and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants , and went after him .
And they went into Capernaum ; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue , and taught .
And they were astonished at his doctrine : for he taught them as one that had authority , and not as the scribes .
And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit ; and he cried out .
Saying , Let us alone ; what have we to do with thee , thou Jesus of Nazareth ? art thou come to destroy us ? I know thee who thou art , the Holy One of God .
And Jesus rebuked him , saying , Hold thy peace , and come out of him .
And when the unclean spirit had torn him , and cried with a loud voice , he came out of him .
And they were all amazed , insomuch that they questioned among themselves , saying , What thing is this ? what new doctrine is this ? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits , and they do obey him .
And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee .
And forthwith , when they were come out of the synagogue , they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew , with James and John .
But Simon ' s wife ' s mother lay sick of a fever , and anon they tell him of her .
And he came and took her by the hand , and lifted her up ; and immediately the fever left her , and she ministered unto them .
And at even , when the sun did set , they brought unto him all that were diseased , and them that were possessed with devils .
And all the city was gathered together at the door .
And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases , and cast out many devils ; and suffered not the devils to speak , because they knew him .
And in the morning , rising up a great while before day , he went out , and departed into a solitary place , and there prayed .
And Simon and they that were with him followed after him .
And when they had found him , they said unto him , All men seek for thee .
And he said unto them , Let us go into the next towns , that I may preach there also : for therefore came I forth .
And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee , and cast out devils .
And there came a leper to him , beseeching him , and kneeling down to him , and saying unto him , If thou wilt , thou canst make me clean .
And Jesus , moved with compassion , put forth his hand , and touched him , and saith unto him , I will ; be thou clean .
And as soon as he had spoken , immediately the leprosy departed from him , and he was cleansed .
And he straitly charged him , and forthwith sent him away .
And saith unto him , See thou say nothing to any man : but go thy way , shew thyself to the priest , and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded , for a testimony unto them .
But he went out , and began to publish it much , and to blaze abroad the matter , insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city , but was without in desert places : and they came to him from every quarter .
And again he entered into Capernaum after some days ; and it was noised that he was in the house .
And straightway many were gathered together , insomuch that there was no room to receive them , no , not so much as about the door : and he preached the word unto them .
And they come unto him , bringing one sick of the palsy , which was borne of four .
And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press , they uncovered the roof where he was : and when they had broken it up , they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay .
When Jesus saw their faith , he said unto the sick of the palsy , Son , thy sins be forgiven thee .
But there were certain of the scribes sitting there , and reasoning in their hearts .
Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies ? who can forgive sins but God only ?
And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves , he said unto them , Why reason ye these things in your hearts ?
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy , Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or to say , Arise , and take up thy bed , and walk ?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins , ( he saith to the sick of the palsy , )
I say unto thee , Arise , and take up thy bed , and go thy way into thine house .
And immediately he arose , took up the bed , and went forth before them all ; insomuch that they were all amazed , and glorified God , saying , We never saw it on this fashion .
And he went forth again by the sea side ; and all the multitude resorted unto him , and he taught them .
And as he passed by , he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the receipt of custom , and said unto him , Follow me . And he arose and followed him .
And it came to pass , that , as Jesus sat at meat in his house , many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples : for there were many , and they followed him .
And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners , they said unto his disciples , How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners ?
When Jesus heard it , he saith unto them , They that are whole have no need of the physician , but they that are sick : I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance .
And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast : and they come and say unto him , Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast , but thy disciples fast not ?
And Jesus said unto them , Can the children of the bridechamber fast , while the bridegroom is with them ? as long as they have the bridegroom with them , they cannot fast .
But the days will come , when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them , and then shall they fast in those days .
No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment : else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old , and the rent is made worse .
And no man putteth new wine into old bottles : else the new wine doth burst the bottles , and the wine is spilled , and the bottles will be marred : but new wine must be put into new bottles .
And it came to pass , that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day ; and his disciples began , as they went , to pluck the ears of corn .
And the Pharisees said unto him , Behold , why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful ?
And he said unto them , Have ye never read what David did , when he had need , and was an hungred , he , and they that were with him ?
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest , and did eat the shewbread , which is not lawful to eat but for the priests , and gave also to them which were with him ?
And he said unto them , The sabbath was made for man , and not man for the sabbath .
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath .
And he entered again into the synagogue ; and there was a man there which had a withered hand .
And they watched him , whether he would heal him on the sabbath day ; that they might accuse him .
And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand , Stand forth .
And he saith unto them , Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days , or to do evil ? to save life , or to kill ? But they held their peace .
And when he had looked round about on them with anger , being grieved for the hardness of their hearts , he saith unto the man , Stretch forth thine hand . And he stretched it out : and his hand was restored whole as the other .
And the Pharisees went forth , and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him , how they might destroy him .
But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea : and a great multitude from Galilee followed him , and from Judaea .
And from Jerusalem , and from Idumaea , and from beyond Jordan ; and they about Tyre and Sidon , a great multitude , when they had heard what great things he did , came unto him .
And he spake to his disciples , that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude , lest they should throng him .
For he had healed many ; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him , as many as had plagues .
And unclean spirits , when they saw him , fell down before him , and cried , saying , Thou art the Son of God .
And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known .
And he goeth up into a mountain , and calleth unto him whom he would : and they came unto him .
And he ordained twelve , that they should be with him , and that he might send them forth to preach .
And to have power to heal sicknesses , and to cast out devils .
And Simon he surnamed Peter .
And James the son of Zebedee , and John the brother of James ; and he surnamed them Boanerges , which is , The sons of thunder .
And Andrew , and Philip , and Bartholomew , and Matthew , and Thomas , and James the son of Alphaeus , and Thaddaeus , and Simon the Canaanite .
And Judas Iscariot , which also betrayed him : and they went into an house .
And the multitude cometh together again , so that they could not so much as eat bread .
And when his friends heard of it , they went out to lay hold on him : for they said , He is beside himself .
And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said , He hath Beelzebub , and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils .
And he called them unto him , and said unto them in parables , How can Satan cast out Satan ?
And if a kingdom be divided against itself , that kingdom cannot stand .
And if a house be divided against itself , that house cannot stand .
And if Satan rise up against himself , and be divided , he cannot stand , but hath an end .
No man can enter into a strong man ' s house , and spoil his goods , except he will first bind the strong man ; and then he will spoil his house .
Verily I say unto you , All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men , and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme .
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness , but is in danger of eternal damnation .
Because they said , He hath an unclean spirit .
There came then his brethren and his mother , and , standing without , sent unto him , calling him .
And the multitude sat about him , and they said unto him , Behold , thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee .
And he answered them , saying , Who is my mother , or my brethren ?
And he looked round about on them which sat about him , and said , Behold my mother and my brethren !
For whosoever shall do the will of God , the same is my brother , and my sister , and mother .
And he began again to teach by the sea side : and there was gathered unto him a great multitude , so that he entered into a ship , and sat in the sea ; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land .
And he taught them many things by parables , and said unto them in his doctrine .
Hearken ; Behold , there went out a sower to sow .
And it came to pass , as he sowed , some fell by the way side , and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up .
And some fell on stony ground , where it had not much earth ; and immediately it sprang up , because it had no depth of earth .
But when the sun was up , it was scorched ; and because it had no root , it withered away .
And some fell among thorns , and the thorns grew up , and choked it , and it yielded no fruit .
And other fell on good ground , and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased ; and brought forth , some thirty , and some sixty , and some an hundred .
And he said unto them , He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
And when he was alone , they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable .
And he said unto them , Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God : but unto them that are without , all these things are done in parables .
That seeing they may see , and not perceive ; and hearing they may hear , and not understand ; lest at any time they should be converted , and their sins should be forgiven them .
And he said unto them , Know ye not this parable ? and how then will ye know all parables ?
The sower soweth the word .
And these are they by the way side , where the word is sown ; but when they have heard , Satan cometh immediately , and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts .
And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground ; who , when they have heard the word , immediately receive it with gladness .
And have no root in themselves , and so endure but for a time : afterward , when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word ' s sake , immediately they are offended .
And these are they which are sown among thorns ; such as hear the word .
And the cares of this world , and the deceitfulness of riches , and the lusts of other things entering in , choke the word , and it becometh unfruitful .
And these are they which are sown on good ground ; such as hear the word , and receive it , and bring forth fruit , some thirtyfold , some sixty , and some an hundred .
And he said unto them , Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel , or under a bed ? and not to be set on a candlestick ?
For there is nothing hid , which shall not be manifested ; neither was any thing kept secret , but that it should come abroad .
If any man have ears to hear , let him hear .
And he said unto them , Take heed what ye hear : with what measure ye mete , it shall be measured to you : and unto you that hear shall more be given .
For he that hath , to him shall be given : and he that hath not , from him shall be taken even that which he hath .
And he said , So is the kingdom of God , as if a man should cast seed into the ground .
And should sleep , and rise night and day , and the seed should spring and grow up , he knoweth not how .
For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself ; first the blade , then the ear , after that the full corn in the ear .
But when the fruit is brought forth , immediately he putteth in the sickle , because the harvest is come .
And he said , Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God ? or with what comparison shall we compare it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed , which , when it is sown in the earth , is less than all the seeds that be in the earth .
But when it is sown , it groweth up , and becometh greater than all herbs , and shooteth out great branches ; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it .
And with many such parables spake he the word unto them , as they were able to hear it .
But without a parable spake he not unto them : and when they were alone , he expounded all things to his disciples .
And the same day , when the even was come , he saith unto them , Let us pass over unto the other side .
And when they had sent away the multitude , they took him even as he was in the ship . And there were also with him other little ships .
And there arose a great storm of wind , and the waves beat into the ship , so that it was now full .
And he was in the hinder part of the ship , asleep on a pillow : and they awake him , and say unto him , Master , carest thou not that we perish ?
And he arose , and rebuked the wind , and said unto the sea , Peace , be still . And the wind ceased , and there was a great calm .
And he said unto them , Why are ye so fearful ? how is it that ye have no faith ?
And they feared exceedingly , and said one to another , What manner of man is this , that even the wind and the sea obey him ?
And they came over unto the other side of the sea , into the country of the Gadarenes .
And when he was come out of the ship , immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit .
Who had his dwelling among the tombs ; and no man could bind him , no , not with chains .
Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains , and the chains had been plucked asunder by him , and the fetters broken in pieces : neither could any man tame him .
And always , night and day , he was in the mountains , and in the tombs , crying , and cutting himself with stones .
But when he saw Jesus afar off , he ran and worshipped him .
And cried with a loud voice , and said , What have I to do with thee , Jesus , thou Son of the most high God ? I adjure thee by God , that thou torment me not .
For he said unto him , Come out of the man , thou unclean spirit .
And he asked him , What is thy name ? And he answered , saying , My name is Legion : for we are many .
And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country .
Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding .
And all the devils besought him , saying , Send us into the swine , that we may enter into them .
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave . And the unclean spirits went out , and entered into the swine : and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea , ( they were about two thousand ; ) and were choked in the sea .
And they that fed the swine fled , and told it in the city , and in the country . And they went out to see what it was that was done .
And they come to Jesus , and see him that was possessed with the devil , and had the legion , sitting , and clothed , and in his right mind : and they were afraid .
And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil , and also concerning the swine .
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts .
And when he was come into the ship , he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him .
Howbeit Jesus suffered him not , but saith unto him , Go home to thy friends , and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee , and hath had compassion on thee .
And he departed , and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him : and all men did marvel .
And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side , much people gathered unto him : and he was nigh unto the sea .
And , behold , there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue , Jairus by name ; and when he saw him , he fell at his feet .
And besought him greatly , saying , My little daughter lieth at the point of death : I pray thee , come and lay thy hands on her , that she may be healed ; and she shall live .
And Jesus went with him ; and much people followed him , and thronged him .
And a certain woman , which had an issue of blood twelve years .
And had suffered many things of many physicians , and had spent all that she had , and was nothing bettered , but rather grew worse .
When she had heard of Jesus , came in the press behind , and touched his garment .
For she said , If I may touch but his clothes , I shall be whole .
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up ; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague .
And Jesus , immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him , turned him about in the press , and said , Who touched my clothes ?
And his disciples said unto him , Thou seest the multitude thronging thee , and sayest thou , Who touched me ?
And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing .
But the woman fearing and trembling , knowing what was done in her , came and fell down before him , and told him all the truth .
And he said unto her , Daughter , thy faith hath made thee whole ; go in peace , and be whole of thy plague .
While he yet spake , there came from the ruler of the synagogue ' s house certain which said , Thy daughter is dead : why troublest thou the Master any further ?
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken , he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue , Be not afraid , only believe .
And he suffered no man to follow him , save Peter , and James , and John the brother of James .
And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue , and seeth the tumult , and them that wept and wailed greatly .
And when he was come in , he saith unto them , Why make ye this ado , and weep ? the damsel is not dead , but sleepeth .
And they laughed him to scorn . But when he had put them all out , he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel , and them that were with him , and entereth in where the damsel was lying .
And he took the damsel by the hand , and said unto her , Talitha cumi ; which is , being interpreted , Damsel , I say unto thee , arise .
And straightway the damsel arose , and walked ; for she was of the age of twelve years . And they were astonished with a great astonishment .
And he charged them straitly that no man should know it ; and commanded that something should be given her to eat .
And he went out from thence , and came into his own country ; and his disciples follow him .
And when the sabbath day was come , he began to teach in the synagogue : and many hearing him were astonished , saying , From whence hath this man these things ? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him , that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands ?
Is not this the carpenter , the son of Mary , the brother of James , and Joses , and of Juda , and Simon ? and are not his sisters here with us ? And they were offended at him .
But Jesus said unto them , A prophet is not without honour , but in his own country , and among his own kin , and in his own house .
And he could there do no mighty work , save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk , and healed them .
And he marvelled because of their unbelief . And he went round about the villages , teaching .
And he called unto him the twelve , and began to send them forth by two and two ; and gave them power over unclean spirits .
And commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey , save a staff only ; no scrip , no bread , no money in their purse .
But be shod with sandals ; and not put on two coats .
And he said unto them , In what place soever ye enter into an house , there abide till ye depart from that place .
And whosoever shall not receive you , nor hear you , when ye depart thence , shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them . Verily I say unto you , It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment , than for that city .
And they went out , and preached that men should repent .
And they cast out many devils , and anointed with oil many that were sick , and healed them .
And king Herod heard of him ; ( for his name was spread abroad : ) and he said , That John the Baptist was risen from the dead , and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him .
Others said , That it is Elias . And others said , That it is a prophet , or as one of the prophets .
But when Herod heard thereof , he said , It is John , whom I beheaded : he is risen from the dead .
For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John , and bound him in prison for Herodias ' sake , his brother Philip ' s wife : for he had married her .
For John had said unto Herod , It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother ' s wife .
Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him , and would have killed him ; but she could not .
For Herod feared John , knowing that he was a just man and an holy , and observed him ; and when he heard him , he did many things , and heard him gladly .
And when a convenient day was come , that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords , high captains , and chief estates of Galilee .
And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in , and danced , and pleased Herod and them that sat with him , the king said unto the damsel , Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt , and I will give it thee .
And he sware unto her , Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me , I will give it thee , unto the half of my kingdom .
And she went forth , and said unto her mother , What shall I ask ? And she said , The head of John the Baptist .
And she came in straightway with haste unto the king , and asked , saying , I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist .
And the king was exceeding sorry ; yet for his oath ' s sake , and for their sakes which sat with him , he would not reject her .
And immediately the king sent an executioner , and commanded his head to be brought : and he went and beheaded him in the prison .
And brought his head in a charger , and gave it to the damsel : and the damsel gave it to her mother .
And when his disciples heard of it , they came and took up his corpse , and laid it in a tomb .
And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus , and told him all things , both what they had done , and what they had taught .
And he said unto them , Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place , and rest a while : for there were many coming and going , and they had no leisure so much as to eat .
And they departed into a desert place by ship privately .
And the people saw them departing , and many knew him , and ran afoot thither out of all cities , and outwent them , and came together unto him .
And Jesus , when he came out , saw much people , and was moved with compassion toward them , because they were as sheep not having a shepherd : and he began to teach them many things .
And when the day was now far spent , his disciples came unto him , and said , This is a desert place , and now the time is far passed .
Send them away , that they may go into the country round about , and into the villages , and buy themselves bread : for they have nothing to eat .
He answered and said unto them , Give ye them to eat . And they say unto him , Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread , and give them to eat ?
He saith unto them , How many loaves have ye ? go and see . And when they knew , they say , Five , and two fishes .
And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass .
And they sat down in ranks , by hundreds , and by fifties .
And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes , he looked up to heaven , and blessed , and brake the loaves , and gave them to his disciples to set before them ; and the two fishes divided he among them all .
And they did all eat , and were filled .
And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments , and of the fishes .
And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men .
And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship , and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida , while he sent away the people .
And when he had sent them away , he departed into a mountain to pray .
And when even was come , the ship was in the midst of the sea , and he alone on the land .
And he saw them toiling in rowing ; for the wind was contrary unto them : and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them , walking upon the sea , and would have passed by them .
But when they saw him walking upon the sea , they supposed it had been a spirit , and cried out .
For they all saw him , and were troubled . And immediately he talked with them , and saith unto them , Be of good cheer : it is I ; be not afraid .
And he went up unto them into the ship ; and the wind ceased : and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure , and wondered .
For they considered not the miracle of the loaves : for their heart was hardened .
And when they had passed over , they came into the land of Gennesaret , and drew to the shore .
And when they were come out of the ship , straightway they knew him .
And ran through that whole region round about , and began to carry about in beds those that were sick , where they heard he was .
And whithersoever he entered , into villages , or cities , or country , they laid the sick in the streets , and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment : and as many as touched him were made whole .
Then came together unto him the Pharisees , and certain of the scribes , which came from Jerusalem .
And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled , that is to say , with unwashen , hands , they found fault .
For the Pharisees , and all the Jews , except they wash their hands oft , eat not , holding the tradition of the elders .
And when they come from the market , except they wash , they eat not . And many other things there be , which they have received to hold , as the washing of cups , and pots , brasen vessels , and of tables .
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him , Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders , but eat bread with unwashen hands ?
He answered and said unto them , Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites , as it is written , This people honoureth me with their lips , but their heart is far from me .
Howbeit in vain do they worship me , teaching for doctrines the commandments of men .
For laying aside the commandment of God , ye hold the tradition of men , as the washing of pots and cups : and many other such like things ye do .
And he said unto them , Full well ye reject the commandment of God , that ye may keep your own tradition .
For Moses said , Honour thy father and thy mother ; and , Whoso curseth father or mother , let him die the death .
But ye say , If a man shall say to his father or mother , It is Corban , that is to say , a gift , by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me ; he shall be free .
And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother .
Making the word of God of none effect through your tradition , which ye have delivered : and many such like things do ye .
And when he had called all the people unto him , he said unto them , Hearken unto me every one of you , and understand .
There is nothing from without a man , that entering into him can defile him : but the things which come out of him , those are they that defile the man .
If any man have ears to hear , let him hear .
And when he was entered into the house from the people , his disciples asked him concerning the parable .
And he saith unto them , Are ye so without understanding also ? Do ye not perceive , that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man , it cannot defile him .
Because it entereth not into his heart , but into the belly , and goeth out into the draught , purging all meats ?
And he said , That which cometh out of the man , that defileth the man .
For from within , out of the heart of men , proceed evil thoughts , adulteries , fornications , murders .
Thefts , covetousness , wickedness , deceit , lasciviousness , an evil eye , blasphemy , pride , foolishness .
All these evil things come from within , and defile the man .
And from thence he arose , and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon , and entered into an house , and would have no man know it : but he could not be hid .
For a certain woman , whose young daughter had an unclean spirit , heard of him , and came and fell at his feet .
The woman was a Greek , a Syrophenician by nation ; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter .
But Jesus said unto her , Let the children first be filled : for it is not meet to take the children ' s bread , and to cast it unto the dogs .
And she answered and said unto him , Yes , Lord : yet the dogs under the table eat of the children ' s crumbs .
And he said unto her , For this saying go thy way ; the devil is gone out of thy daughter .
And when she was come to her house , she found the devil gone out , and her daughter laid upon the bed .
And again , departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon , he came unto the sea of Galilee , through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis .
And they bring unto him one that was deaf , and had an impediment in his speech ; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him .
And he took him aside from the multitude , and put his fingers into his ears , and he spit , and touched his tongue .
And looking up to heaven , he sighed , and saith unto him , Ephphatha , that is , Be opened .
And straightway his ears were opened , and the string of his tongue was loosed , and he spake plain .
And he charged them that they should tell no man : but the more he charged them , so much the more a great deal they published it .
And were beyond measure astonished , saying , He hath done all things well : he maketh both the deaf to hear , and the dumb to speak .
In those days the multitude being very great , and having nothing to eat , Jesus called his disciples unto him , and saith unto them .
I have compassion on the multitude , because they have now been with me three days , and have nothing to eat .
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses , they will faint by the way : for divers of them came from far .
And his disciples answered him , From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness ?
And he asked them , How many loaves have ye ? And they said , Seven .
And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground : and he took the seven loaves , and gave thanks , and brake , and gave to his disciples to set before them ; and they did set them before the people .
And they had a few small fishes : and he blessed , and commanded to set them also before them .
So they did eat , and were filled : and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets .
And they that had eaten were about four thousand : and he sent them away .
And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples , and came into the parts of Dalmanutha .
And the Pharisees came forth , and began to question with him , seeking of him a sign from heaven , tempting him .
And he sighed deeply in his spirit , and saith , Why doth this generation seek after a sign ? verily I say unto you , There shall no sign be given unto this generation .
And he left them , and entering into the ship again departed to the other side .
Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread , neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf .
And he charged them , saying , Take heed , beware of the leaven of the Pharisees , and of the leaven of Herod .
And they reasoned among themselves , saying , It is because we have no bread .
And when Jesus knew it , he saith unto them , Why reason ye , because ye have no bread ? perceive ye not yet , neither understand ? have ye your heart yet hardened ?
Having eyes , see ye not ? and having ears , hear ye not ? and do ye not remember ?
When I brake the five loaves among five thousand , how many baskets full of fragments took ye up ? They say unto him , Twelve .
And when the seven among four thousand , how many baskets full of fragments took ye up ? And they said , Seven .
And he said unto them , How is it that ye do not understand ?
And he cometh to Bethsaida ; and they bring a blind man unto him , and besought him to touch him .
And he took the blind man by the hand , and led him out of the town ; and when he had spit on his eyes , and put his hands upon him , he asked him if he saw ought .
And he looked up , and said , I see men as trees , walking .
After that he put his hands again upon his eyes , and made him look up : and he was restored , and saw every man clearly .
And he sent him away to his house , saying , Neither go into the town , nor tell it to any in the town .
And Jesus went out , and his disciples , into the towns of Caesarea Philippi : and by the way he asked his disciples , saying unto them , Whom do men say that I am ?
And they answered , John the Baptist : but some say , Elias ; and others , One of the prophets .
And he saith unto them , But whom say ye that I am ? And Peter answereth and saith unto him , Thou art the Christ .
And he charged them that they should tell no man of him .
And he began to teach them , that the Son of man must suffer many things , and be rejected of the elders , and of the chief priests , and scribes , and be killed , and after three days rise again .
And he spake that saying openly . And Peter took him , and began to rebuke him .
But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples , he rebuked Peter , saying , Get thee behind me , Satan : for thou savourest not the things that be of God , but the things that be of men .
And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also , he said unto them , Whosoever will come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross , and follow me .
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it ; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel ' s , the same shall save it .
For what shall it profit a man , if he shall gain the whole world , and lose his own soul ?
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul ?
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation ; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed , when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels .
And he said unto them , Verily I say unto you , That there be some of them that stand here , which shall not taste of death , till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power .
And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter , and James , and John , and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves : and he was transfigured before them .
And his raiment became shining , exceeding white as snow ; so as no fuller on earth can white them .
And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses : and they were talking with Jesus .
And Peter answered and said to Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here : and let us make three tabernacles ; one for thee , and one for Moses , and one for Elias .
For he wist not what to say ; for they were sore afraid .
And there was a cloud that overshadowed them : and a voice came out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son : hear him .
And suddenly , when they had looked round about , they saw no man any more , save Jesus only with themselves .
And as they came down from the mountain , he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen , till the Son of man were risen from the dead .
And they kept that saying with themselves , questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean .
And they asked him , saying , Why say the scribes that Elias must first come ?
And he answered and told them , Elias verily cometh first , and restoreth all things ; and how it is written of the Son of man , that he must suffer many things , and be set at nought .
But I say unto you , That Elias is indeed come , and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed , as it is written of him .
And when he came to his disciples , he saw a great multitude about them , and the scribes questioning with them .
And straightway all the people , when they beheld him , were greatly amazed , and running to him saluted him .
And he asked the scribes , What question ye with them ?
And one of the multitude answered and said , Master , I have brought unto thee my son , which hath a dumb spirit .
And wheresoever he taketh him , he teareth him : and he foameth , and gnasheth with his teeth , and pineth away : and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out ; and they could not .
He answereth him , and saith , O faithless generation , how long shall I be with you ? how long shall I suffer you ? bring him unto me .
And they brought him unto him : and when he saw him , straightway the spirit tare him ; and he fell on the ground , and wallowed foaming .
And he asked his father , How long is it ago since this came unto him ? And he said , Of a child .
And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire , and into the waters , to destroy him : but if thou canst do any thing , have compassion on us , and help us .
Jesus said unto him , If thou canst believe , all things are possible to him that believeth .
And straightway the father of the child cried out , and said with tears , Lord , I believe ; help thou mine unbelief .
When Jesus saw that the people came running together , he rebuked the foul spirit , saying unto him , Thou dumb and deaf spirit , I charge thee , come out of him , and enter no more into him .
And the spirit cried , and rent him sore , and came out of him : and he was as one dead ; insomuch that many said , He is dead .
But Jesus took him by the hand , and lifted him up ; and he arose .
And when he was come into the house , his disciples asked him privately , Why could not we cast him out ?
And he said unto them , This kind can come forth by nothing , but by prayer and fasting .
And they departed thence , and passed through Galilee ; and he would not that any man should know it .
For he taught his disciples , and said unto them , The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men , and they shall kill him ; and after that he is killed , he shall rise the third day .
But they understood not that saying , and were afraid to ask him .
And he came to Capernaum : and being in the house he asked them , What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way ?
But they held their peace : for by the way they had disputed among themselves , who should be the greatest .
And he sat down , and called the twelve , and saith unto them , If any man desire to be first , the same shall be last of all , and servant of all .
And he took a child , and set him in the midst of them : and when he had taken him in his arms , he said unto them .
Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name , receiveth me : and whosoever shall receive me , receiveth not me , but him that sent me .
And John answered him , saying , Master , we saw one casting out devils in thy name , and he followeth not us : and we forbad him , because he followeth not us .
But Jesus said , Forbid him not : for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name , that can lightly speak evil of me .
For he that is not against us is on our part .
For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name , because ye belong to Christ , verily I say unto you , he shall not lose his reward .
And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me , it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck , and he were cast into the sea .
And if thy hand offend thee , cut it off : it is better for thee to enter into life maimed , than having two hands to go into hell , into the fire that never shall be quenched .
Where their worm dieth not , and the fire is not quenched .
And if thy foot offend thee , cut it off : it is better for thee to enter halt into life , than having two feet to be cast into hell , into the fire that never shall be quenched .
Where their worm dieth not , and the fire is not quenched .
And if thine eye offend thee , pluck it out : it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye , than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire .
Where their worm dieth not , and the fire is not quenched .
For every one shall be salted with fire , and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt .
Salt is good : but if the salt have lost his saltness , wherewith will ye season it ? Have salt in yourselves , and have peace one with another .
And he arose from thence , and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by the farther side of Jordan : and the people resort unto him again ; and , as he was wont , he taught them again .
And the Pharisees came to him , and asked him , Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife ? tempting him .
And he answered and said unto them , What did Moses command you ?
And they said , Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement , and to put her away .
And Jesus answered and said unto them , For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept .
But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female .
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother , and cleave to his wife .
And they twain shall be one flesh : so then they are no more twain , but one flesh .
What therefore God hath joined together , let not man put asunder .
And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter .
And he saith unto them , Whosoever shall put away his wife , and marry another , committeth adultery against her .
And if a woman shall put away her husband , and be married to another , she committeth adultery .
And they brought young children to him , that he should touch them : and his disciples rebuked those that brought them .
But when Jesus saw it , he was much displeased , and said unto them , Suffer the little children to come unto me , and forbid them not : for of such is the kingdom of God .
Verily I say unto you , Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child , he shall not enter therein .
And he took them up in his arms , put his hands upon them , and blessed them .
And when he was gone forth into the way , there came one running , and kneeled to him , and asked him , Good Master , what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ?
And Jesus said unto him , Why callest thou me good ? there is none good but one , that is , God .
Thou knowest the commandments , Do not commit adultery , Do not kill , Do not steal , Do not bear false witness , Defraud not , Honour thy father and mother .
And he answered and said unto him , Master , all these have I observed from my youth .
Then Jesus beholding him loved him , and said unto him , One thing thou lackest : go thy way , sell whatsoever thou hast , and give to the poor , and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come , take up the cross , and follow me .
And he was sad at that saying , and went away grieved : for he had great possessions .
And Jesus looked round about , and saith unto his disciples , How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God !
And the disciples were astonished at his words . But Jesus answereth again , and saith unto them , Children , how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God !
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God .
And they were astonished out of measure , saying among themselves , Who then can be saved ?
And Jesus looking upon them saith , With men it is impossible , but not with God : for with God all things are possible .
Then Peter began to say unto him , Lo , we have left all , and have followed thee .
And Jesus answered and said , Verily I say unto you , There is no man that hath left house , or brethren , or sisters , or father , or mother , or wife , or children , or lands , for my sake , and the gospel ' s .
But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time , houses , and brethren , and sisters , and mothers , and children , and lands , with persecutions ; and in the world to come eternal life .
But many that are first shall be last ; and the last first .
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem ; and Jesus went before them : and they were amazed ; and as they followed , they were afraid . And he took again the twelve , and began to tell them what things should happen unto him .
Saying , Behold , we go up to Jerusalem ; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests , and unto the scribes ; and they shall condemn him to death , and shall deliver him to the Gentiles .
And they shall mock him , and shall scourge him , and shall spit upon him , and shall kill him : and the third day he shall rise again .
And James and John , the sons of Zebedee , come unto him , saying , Master , we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire .
And he said unto them , What would ye that I should do for you ?
They said unto him , Grant unto us that we may sit , one on thy right hand , and the other on thy left hand , in thy glory .
But Jesus said unto them , Ye know not what ye ask : can ye drink of the cup that I drink of ? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with ?
And they said unto him , We can . And Jesus said unto them , Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of ; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized .
But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give ; but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared .
And when the ten heard it , they began to be much displeased with James and John .
But Jesus called them to him , and saith unto them , Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them ; and their great ones exercise authority upon them .
But so shall it not be among you : but whosoever will be great among you , shall be your minister .
And whosoever of you will be the chiefest , shall be servant of all .
For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto , but to minister , and to give his life a ransom for many .
And they came to Jericho : and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people , blind Bartimaeus , the son of Timaeus , sat by the highway side begging .
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth , he began to cry out , and say , Jesus , thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And many charged him that he should hold his peace : but he cried the more a great deal , Thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus stood still , and commanded him to be called . And they call the blind man , saying unto him , Be of good comfort , rise ; he calleth thee .
And he , casting away his garment , rose , and came to Jesus .
And Jesus answered and said unto him , What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ? The blind man said unto him , Lord , that I might receive my sight .
And Jesus said unto him , Go thy way ; thy faith hath made thee whole . And immediately he received his sight , and followed Jesus in the way .
And when they came nigh to Jerusalem , unto Bethphage and Bethany , at the mount of Olives , he sendeth forth two of his disciples .
And saith unto them , Go your way into the village over against you : and as soon as ye be entered into it , ye shall find a colt tied , whereon never man sat ; loose him , and bring him .
And if any man say unto you , Why do ye this ? say ye that the Lord hath need of him ; and straightway he will send him hither .
And they went their way , and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met ; and they loose him .
And certain of them that stood there said unto them , What do ye , loosing the colt ?
And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded : and they let them go .
And they brought the colt to Jesus , and cast their garments on him ; and he sat upon him .
And many spread their garments in the way : and others cut down branches off the trees , and strawed them in the way .
And they that went before , and they that followed , cried , saying , Hosanna ; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord .
Blessed be the kingdom of our father David , that cometh in the name of the Lord : Hosanna in the highest .
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem , and into the temple : and when he had looked round about upon all things , and now the eventide was come , he went out unto Bethany with the twelve .
And on the morrow , when they were come from Bethany , he was hungry .
And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves , he came , if haply he might find any thing thereon : and when he came to it , he found nothing but leaves ; for the time of figs was not yet .
And Jesus answered and said unto it , No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever . And his disciples heard it .
And they come to Jerusalem : and Jesus went into the temple , and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple , and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers , and the seats of them that sold doves .
And would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple .
And he taught , saying unto them , Is it not written , My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer ? but ye have made it a den of thieves .
And the scribes and chief priests heard it , and sought how they might destroy him : for they feared him , because all the people was astonished at his doctrine .
And when even was come , he went out of the city .
And in the morning , as they passed by , they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots .
And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him , Master , behold , the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away .
And Jesus answering saith unto them , Have faith in God .
For verily I say unto you , That whosoever shall say unto this mountain , Be thou removed , and be thou cast into the sea ; and shall not doubt in his heart , but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass ; he shall have whatsoever he saith .
Therefore I say unto you , What things soever ye desire , when ye pray , believe that ye receive them , and ye shall have them .
And when ye stand praying , forgive , if ye have ought against any : that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses .
But if ye do not forgive , neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses .
And they come again to Jerusalem : and as he was walking in the temple , there come to him the chief priests , and the scribes , and the elders .
And say unto him , By what authority doest thou these things ? and who gave thee this authority to do these things ?
And Jesus answered and said unto them , I will also ask of you one question , and answer me , and I will tell you by what authority I do these things .
The baptism of John , was it from heaven , or of men ? answer me .
And they reasoned with themselves , saying , If we shall say , From heaven ; he will say , Why then did ye not believe him ?
But if we shall say , Of men ; they feared the people : for all men counted John , that he was a prophet indeed .
And they answered and said unto Jesus , We cannot tell . And Jesus answering saith unto them , Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things .
And he began to speak unto them by parables . A certain man planted a vineyard , and set an hedge about it , and digged a place for the winefat , and built a tower , and let it out to husbandmen , and went into a far country .
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant , that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard .
And they caught him , and beat him , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent unto them another servant ; and at him they cast stones , and wounded him in the head , and sent him away shamefully handled .
And again he sent another ; and him they killed , and many others ; beating some , and killing some .
Having yet therefore one son , his wellbeloved , he sent him also last unto them , saying , They will reverence my son .
But those husbandmen said among themselves , This is the heir ; come , let us kill him , and the inheritance shall be ours .
And they took him , and killed him , and cast him out of the vineyard .
What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do ? he will come and destroy the husbandmen , and will give the vineyard unto others .
And have ye not read this scripture ; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner .
This was the Lord ' s doing , and it is marvellous in our eyes ?
And they sought to lay hold on him , but feared the people : for they knew that he had spoken the parable against them : and they left him , and went their way .
And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians , to catch him in his words .
And when they were come , they say unto him , Master , we know that thou art true , and carest for no man : for thou regardest not the person of men , but teachest the way of God in truth : Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar , or not ?
Shall we give , or shall we not give ? But he , knowing their hypocrisy , said unto them , Why tempt ye me ? bring me a penny , that I may see it .
And they brought it . And he saith unto them , Whose is this image and superscription ? And they said unto him , Caesar ' s .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar ' s , and to God the things that are God ' s . And they marvelled at him .
Then come unto him the Sadducees , which say there is no resurrection ; and they asked him , saying .
Master , Moses wrote unto us , If a man ' s brother die , and leave his wife behind him , and leave no children , that his brother should take his wife , and raise up seed unto his brother .
Now there were seven brethren : and the first took a wife , and dying left no seed .
And the second took her , and died , neither left he any seed : and the third likewise .
And the seven had her , and left no seed : last of all the woman died also .
In the resurrection therefore , when they shall rise , whose wife shall she be of them ? for the seven had her to wife .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Do ye not therefore err , because ye know not the scriptures , neither the power of God ?
For when they shall rise from the dead , they neither marry , nor are given in marriage ; but are as the angels which are in heaven .
And as touching the dead , that they rise : have ye not read in the book of Moses , how in the bush God spake unto him , saying , I am the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob ?
He is not the God of the dead , but the God of the living : ye therefore do greatly err .
And one of the scribes came , and having heard them reasoning together , and perceiving that he had answered them well , asked him , Which is the first commandment of all ?
And Jesus answered him , The first of all the commandments is , Hear , O Israel ; The Lord our God is one Lord .
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy mind , and with all thy strength : this is the first commandment .
And the second is like , namely this , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself . There is none other commandment greater than these .
And the scribe said unto him , Well , Master , thou hast said the truth : for there is one God ; and there is none other but he .
And to love him with all the heart , and with all the understanding , and with all the soul , and with all the strength , and to love his neighbour as himself , is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices .
And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly , he said unto him , Thou art not far from the kingdom of God . And no man after that durst ask him any question .
And Jesus answered and said , while he taught in the temple , How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David ?
For David himself said by the Holy Ghost , The LORD said to my Lord , Sit thou on my right hand , till I make thine enemies thy footstool .
David therefore himself calleth him Lord ; and whence is he then his son ? And the common people heard him gladly .
And he said unto them in his doctrine , Beware of the scribes , which love to go in long clothing , and love salutations in the marketplaces .
And the chief seats in the synagogues , and the uppermost rooms at feasts .
Which devour widows ' houses , and for a pretence make long prayers : these shall receive greater damnation .
And Jesus sat over against the treasury , and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury : and many that were rich cast in much .
And there came a certain poor widow , and she threw in two mites , which make a farthing .
And he called unto him his disciples , and saith unto them , Verily I say unto you , That this poor widow hath cast more in , than all they which have cast into the treasury .
For all they did cast in of their abundance ; but she of her want did cast in all that she had , even all her living .
And as he went out of the temple , one of his disciples saith unto him , Master , see what manner of stones and what buildings are here !
And Jesus answering said unto him , Seest thou these great buildings ? there shall not be left one stone upon another , that shall not be thrown down .
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple , Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately .
Tell us , when shall these things be ? and what shall be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled ?
And Jesus answering them began to say , Take heed lest any man deceive you .
For many shall come in my name , saying , I am Christ ; and shall deceive many .
And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars , be ye not troubled : for such things must needs be ; but the end shall not be yet .
For nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom : and there shall be earthquakes in divers places , and there shall be famines and troubles : these are the beginnings of sorrows .
But take heed to yourselves : for they shall deliver you up to councils ; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten : and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake , for a testimony against them .
And the gospel must first be published among all nations .
But when they shall lead you , and deliver you up , take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak , neither do ye premeditate : but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour , that speak ye : for it is not ye that speak , but the Holy Ghost .
Now the brother shall betray the brother to death , and the father the son ; and children shall rise up against their parents , and shall cause them to be put to death .
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name ' s sake : but he that shall endure unto the end , the same shall be saved .
But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation , spoken of by Daniel the prophet , standing where it ought not , ( let him that readeth understand , ) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the mountains .
And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house , neither enter therein , to take any thing out of his house .
And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment .
But woe to them that are with child , and to them that give suck in those days !
And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter .
For in those days shall be affliction , such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time , neither shall be .
And except that the Lord had shortened those days , no flesh should be saved : but for the elect ' s sake , whom he hath chosen , he hath shortened the days .
And then if any man shall say to you , Lo , here is Christ ; or , lo , he is there ; believe him not .
For false Christs and false prophets shall rise , and shall shew signs and wonders , to seduce , if it were possible , even the elect .
But take ye heed : behold , I have foretold you all things .
But in those days , after that tribulation , the sun shall be darkened , and the moon shall not give her light .
And the stars of heaven shall fall , and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken .
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory .
And then shall he send his angels , and shall gather together his elect from the four winds , from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven .
Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; When her branch is yet tender , and putteth forth leaves , ye know that summer is near .
So ye in like manner , when ye shall see these things come to pass , know that it is nigh , even at the doors .
Verily I say unto you , that this generation shall not pass , till all these things be done .
Heaven and earth shall pass away : but my words shall not pass away .
But of that day and that hour knoweth no man , no , not the angels which are in heaven , neither the Son , but the Father .
Take ye heed , watch and pray : for ye know not when the time is .
For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey , who left his house , and gave authority to his servants , and to every man his work , and commanded the porter to watch .
Watch ye therefore : for ye know not when the master of the house cometh , at even , or at midnight , or at the cockcrowing , or in the morning .
Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping .
And what I say unto you I say unto all , Watch .
After two days was the feast of the passover , and of unleavened bread : and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft , and put him to death .
But they said , Not on the feast day , lest there be an uproar of the people .
And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper , as he sat at meat , there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious ; and she brake the box , and poured it on his head .
And there were some that had indignation within themselves , and said , Why was this waste of the ointment made ?
For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence , and have been given to the poor . And they murmured against her .
And Jesus said , Let her alone ; why trouble ye her ? she hath wrought a good work on me .
For ye have the poor with you always , and whensoever ye will ye may do them good : but me ye have not always .
She hath done what she could : she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying .
Verily I say unto you , Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world , this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her .
And Judas Iscariot , one of the twelve , went unto the chief priests , to betray him unto them .
And when they heard it , they were glad , and promised to give him money . And he sought how he might conveniently betray him .
And the first day of unleavened bread , when they killed the passover , his disciples said unto him , Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover ?
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples , and saith unto them , Go ye into the city , and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water : follow him .
And wheresoever he shall go in , say ye to the goodman of the house , The Master saith , Where is the guestchamber , where I shall eat the passover with my disciples ?
And he will shew you a large upper room furnished and prepared : there make ready for us .
And his disciples went forth , and came into the city , and found as he had said unto them : and they made ready the passover .
And in the evening he cometh with the twelve .
And as they sat and did eat , Jesus said , Verily I say unto you , One of you which eateth with me shall betray me .
And they began to be sorrowful , and to say unto him one by one , Is it I ? and another said , Is it I ?
And he answered and said unto them , It is one of the twelve , that dippeth with me in the dish .
The Son of man indeed goeth , as it is written of him : but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed ! good were it for that man if he had never been born .
And as they did eat , Jesus took bread , and blessed , and brake it , and gave to them , and said , Take , eat : this is my body .
And he took the cup , and when he had given thanks , he gave it to them : and they all drank of it .
And he said unto them , This is my blood of the new testament , which is shed for many .
Verily I say unto you , I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine , until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God .
And when they had sung an hymn , they went out into the mount of Olives .
And Jesus saith unto them , All ye shall be offended because of me this night : for it is written , I will smite the shepherd , and the sheep shall be scattered .
But after that I am risen , I will go before you into Galilee .
But Peter said unto him , Although all shall be offended , yet will not I .
And Jesus saith unto him , Verily I say unto thee , That this day , even in this night , before the cock crow twice , thou shalt deny me thrice .
But he spake the more vehemently , If I should die with thee , I will not deny thee in any wise . Likewise also said they all .
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane : and he saith to his disciples , Sit ye here , while I shall pray .
And he taketh with him Peter and James and John , and began to be sore amazed , and to be very heavy .
And saith unto them , My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death : tarry ye here , and watch .
And he went forward a little , and fell on the ground , and prayed that , if it were possible , the hour might pass from him .
And he said , Abba , Father , all things are possible unto thee ; take away this cup from me : nevertheless not what I will , but what thou wilt .
And he cometh , and findeth them sleeping , and saith unto Peter , Simon , sleepest thou ? couldest not thou watch one hour ?
Watch ye and pray , lest ye enter into temptation . The spirit truly is ready , but the flesh is weak .
And again he went away , and prayed , and spake the same words .
And when he returned , he found them asleep again , ( for their eyes were heavy , ) neither wist they what to answer him .
And he cometh the third time , and saith unto them , Sleep on now , and take your rest : it is enough , the hour is come ; behold , the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners .
Rise up , let us go ; lo , he that betrayeth me is at hand .
And immediately , while he yet spake , cometh Judas , one of the twelve , and with him a great multitude with swords and staves , from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders .
And he that betrayed him had given them a token , saying , Whomsoever I shall kiss , that same is he ; take him , and lead him away safely .
And as soon as he was come , he goeth straightway to him , and saith , Master , master ; and kissed him .
And they laid their hands on him , and took him .
And one of them that stood by drew a sword , and smote a servant of the high priest , and cut off his ear .
And Jesus answered and said unto them , Are ye come out , as against a thief , with swords and with staves to take me ?
I was daily with you in the temple teaching , and ye took me not : but the scriptures must be fulfilled .
And they all forsook him , and fled .
And there followed him a certain young man , having a linen cloth cast about his naked body ; and the young men laid hold on him .
And he left the linen cloth , and fled from them naked .
And they led Jesus away to the high priest : and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes .
And Peter followed him afar off , even into the palace of the high priest : and he sat with the servants , and warmed himself at the fire .
And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death ; and found none .
For many bare false witness against him , but their witness agreed not together .
And there arose certain , and bare false witness against him , saying .
We heard him say , I will destroy this temple that is made with hands , and within three days I will build another made without hands .
But neither so did their witness agree together .
And the high priest stood up in the midst , and asked Jesus , saying , Answerest thou nothing ? what is it which these witness against thee ?
But he held his peace , and answered nothing . Again the high priest asked him , and said unto him , Art thou the Christ , the Son of the Blessed ?
And Jesus said , I am : and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power , and coming in the clouds of heaven .
Then the high priest rent his clothes , and saith , What need we any further witnesses ?
Ye have heard the blasphemy : what think ye ? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death .
And some began to spit on him , and to cover his face , and to buffet him , and to say unto him , Prophesy : and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands .
And as Peter was beneath in the palace , there cometh one of the maids of the high priest .
And when she saw Peter warming himself , she looked upon him , and said , And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth .
But he denied , saying , I know not , neither understand I what thou sayest . And he went out into the porch ; and the cock crew .
And a maid saw him again , and began to say to them that stood by , This is one of them .
And he denied it again . And a little after , they that stood by said again to Peter , Surely thou art one of them : for thou art a Galilaean , and thy speech agreeth thereto .
But he began to curse and to swear , saying , I know not this man of whom ye speak .
And the second time the cock crew . And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him , Before the cock crow twice , thou shalt deny me thrice . And when he thought thereon , he wept .
And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council , and bound Jesus , and carried him away , and delivered him to Pilate .
And Pilate asked him , Art thou the King of the Jews ? And he answering said unto him , Thou sayest it .
And the chief priests accused him of many things : but he answered nothing .
And Pilate asked him again , saying , Answerest thou nothing ? behold how many things they witness against thee .
But Jesus yet answered nothing ; so that Pilate marvelled .
Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner , whomsoever they desired .
And there was one named Barabbas , which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him , who had committed murder in the insurrection .
And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto them .
But Pilate answered them , saying , Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews ?
For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy .
But the chief priests moved the people , that he should rather release Barabbas unto them .
And Pilate answered and said again unto them , What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews ?
And they cried out again , Crucify him .
Then Pilate said unto them , Why , what evil hath he done ? And they cried out the more exceedingly , Crucify him .
And so Pilate , willing to content the people , released Barabbas unto them , and delivered Jesus , when he had scourged him , to be crucified .
And the soldiers led him away into the hall , called Praetorium ; and they call together the whole band .
And they clothed him with purple , and platted a crown of thorns , and put it about his head .
And began to salute him , Hail , King of the Jews !
And they smote him on the head with a reed , and did spit upon him , and bowing their knees worshipped him .
And when they had mocked him , they took off the purple from him , and put his own clothes on him , and led him out to crucify him .
And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian , who passed by , coming out of the country , the father of Alexander and Rufus , to bear his cross .
And they bring him unto the place Golgotha , which is , being interpreted , The place of a skull .
And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh : but he received it not .
And when they had crucified him , they parted his garments , casting lots upon them , what every man should take .
And it was the third hour , and they crucified him .
And the superscription of his accusation was written over , THE KING OF THE JEWS .
And with him they crucify two thieves ; the one on his right hand , and the other on his left .
And the scripture was fulfilled , which saith , And he was numbered with the transgressors .
And they that passed by railed on him , wagging their heads , and saying , Ah , thou that destroyest the temple , and buildest it in three days .
Save thyself , and come down from the cross .
Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes , He saved others ; himself he cannot save .
Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross , that we may see and believe . And they that were crucified with him reviled him .
And when the sixth hour was come , there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour .
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice , saying , Eloi , Eloi , lama sabachthani ? which is , being interpreted , My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ?
And some of them that stood by , when they heard it , said , Behold , he calleth Elias .
And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar , and put it on a reed , and gave him to drink , saying , Let alone ; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down .
And Jesus cried with a loud voice , and gave up the ghost .
And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom .
And when the centurion , which stood over against him , saw that he so cried out , and gave up the ghost , he said , Truly this man was the Son of God .
There were also women looking on afar off : among whom was Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses , and Salome .
( Who also , when he was in Galilee , followed him , and ministered unto him ; ) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem .
And now when the even was come , because it was the preparation , that is , the day before the sabbath .
Joseph of Arimathaea , an honourable counsellor , which also waited for the kingdom of God , came , and went in boldly unto Pilate , and craved the body of Jesus .
And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead : and calling unto him the centurion , he asked him whether he had been any while dead .
And when he knew it of the centurion , he gave the body to Joseph .
And he bought fine linen , and took him down , and wrapped him in the linen , and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock , and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre .
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid .
And when the sabbath was past , Mary Magdalene , and Mary the mother of James , and Salome , had bought sweet spices , that they might come and anoint him .
And very early in the morning the first day of the week , they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun .
And they said among themselves , Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre ?
And when they looked , they saw that the stone was rolled away : for it was very great .
And entering into the sepulchre , they saw a young man sitting on the right side , clothed in a long white garment ; and they were affrighted .
And he saith unto them , Be not affrighted : Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth , which was crucified : he is risen ; he is not here : behold the place where they laid him .
But go your way , tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee : there shall ye see him , as he said unto you .
And they went out quickly , and fled from the sepulchre ; for they trembled and were amazed : neither said they any thing to any man ; for they were afraid .
Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week , he appeared first to Mary Magdalene , out of whom he had cast seven devils .
And she went and told them that had been with him , as they mourned and wept .
And they , when they had heard that he was alive , and had been seen of her , believed not .
After that he appeared in another form unto two of them , as they walked , and went into the country .
And they went and told it unto the residue : neither believed they them .
Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat , and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart , because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen .
And he said unto them , Go ye into all the world , and preach the gospel to every creature .
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned .
And these signs shall follow them that believe ; In my name shall they cast out devils ; they shall speak with new tongues .
They shall take up serpents ; and if they drink any deadly thing , it shall not hurt them ; they shall lay hands on the sick , and they shall recover .
So then after the Lord had spoken unto them , he was received up into heaven , and sat on the right hand of God .
And they went forth , and preached every where , the Lord working with them , and confirming the word with signs following . Amen .
Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us .
Even as they delivered them unto us , which from the beginning were eyewitnesses , and ministers of the word .
It seemed good to me also , having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first , to write unto thee in order , most excellent Theophilus .
That thou mightest know the certainty of those things , wherein thou hast been instructed .
There was in the days of Herod , the king of Judaea , a certain priest named Zacharias , of the course of Abia : and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron , and her name was Elisabeth .
And they were both righteous before God , walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless .
And they had no child , because that Elisabeth was barren , and they both were now well stricken in years .
And it came to pass , that while he executed the priest ' s office before God in the order of his course .
According to the custom of the priest ' s office , his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord .
And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense .
And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense .
And when Zacharias saw him , he was troubled , and fear fell upon him .
But the angel said unto him , Fear not , Zacharias : for thy prayer is heard ; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son , and thou shalt call his name John .
And thou shalt have joy and gladness ; and many shall rejoice at his birth .
For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord , and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink ; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost , even from his mother ' s womb .
And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God .
And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias , to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children , and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just ; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord .
And Zacharias said unto the angel , Whereby shall I know this ? for I am an old man , and my wife well stricken in years .
And the angel answering said unto him , I am Gabriel , that stand in the presence of God ; and am sent to speak unto thee , and to shew thee these glad tidings .
And , behold , thou shalt be dumb , and not able to speak , until the day that these things shall be performed , because thou believest not my words , which shall be fulfilled in their season .
And the people waited for Zacharias , and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple .
And when he came out , he could not speak unto them : and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple : for he beckoned unto them , and remained speechless .
And it came to pass , that , as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished , he departed to his own house .
And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived , and hid herself five months , saying .
Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me , to take away my reproach among men .
And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee , named Nazareth .
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph , of the house of David ; and the virgin ' s name was Mary .
And the angel came in unto her , and said , Hail , thou that art highly favoured , the Lord is with thee : blessed art thou among women .
And when she saw him , she was troubled at his saying , and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be .
And the angel said unto her , Fear not , Mary : for thou hast found favour with God .
And , behold , thou shalt conceive in thy womb , and bring forth a son , and shalt call his name JESUS .
He shall be great , and shall be called the Son of the Highest : and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David .
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever ; and of his kingdom there shall be no end .
Then said Mary unto the angel , How shall this be , seeing I know not a man ?
And the angel answered and said unto her , The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee , and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee : therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God .
And , behold , thy cousin Elisabeth , she hath also conceived a son in her old age : and this is the sixth month with her , who was called barren .
For with God nothing shall be impossible .
And Mary said , Behold the handmaid of the Lord ; be it unto me according to thy word . And the angel departed from her .
And Mary arose in those days , and went into the hill country with haste , into a city of Juda .
And entered into the house of Zacharias , and saluted Elisabeth .
And it came to pass , that , when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary , the babe leaped in her womb ; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost .
And she spake out with a loud voice , and said , Blessed art thou among women , and blessed is the fruit of thy womb .
And whence is this to me , that the mother of my Lord should come to me ?
For , lo , as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears , the babe leaped in my womb for joy .
And blessed is she that believed : for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord .
And Mary said , My soul doth magnify the Lord .
And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour .
For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden : for , behold , from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed .
For he that is mighty hath done to me great things ; and holy is his name .
And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation .
He hath shewed strength with his arm ; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts .
He hath put down the mighty from their seats , and exalted them of low degree .
He hath filled the hungry with good things ; and the rich he hath sent empty away .
He hath holpen his servant Israel , in remembrance of his mercy .
As he spake to our fathers , to Abraham , and to his seed for ever .
And Mary abode with her about three months , and returned to her own house .
Now Elisabeth ' s full time came that she should be delivered ; and she brought forth a son .
And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her ; and they rejoiced with her .
And it came to pass , that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child ; and they called him Zacharias , after the name of his father .
And his mother answered and said , Not so ; but he shall be called John .
And they said unto her , There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name .
And they made signs to his father , how he would have him called .
And he asked for a writing table , and wrote , saying , His name is John . And they marvelled all .
And his mouth was opened immediately , and his tongue loosed , and he spake , and praised God .
And fear came on all that dwelt round about them : and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judaea .
And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts , saying , What manner of child shall this be ! And the hand of the Lord was with him .
And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost , and prophesied , saying .
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel ; for he hath visited and redeemed his people .
And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David .
As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets , which have been since the world began .
That we should be saved from our enemies , and from the hand of all that hate us .
To perform the mercy promised to our fathers , and to remember his holy covenant .
The oath which he sware to our father Abraham .
That he would grant unto us , that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear .
In holiness and righteousness before him , all the days of our life .
And thou , child , shalt be called the prophet of the Highest : for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways .
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins .
Through the tender mercy of our God ; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us .
To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death , to guide our feet into the way of peace .
And the child grew , and waxed strong in spirit , and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel .
And it came to pass in those days , that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus , that all the world should be taxed .
( And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria . )
And all went to be taxed , every one into his own city .
And Joseph also went up from Galilee , out of the city of Nazareth , into Judaea , unto the city of David , which is called Bethlehem ; ( because he was of the house and lineage of David : )
To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife , being great with child .
And so it was , that , while they were there , the days were accomplished that she should be delivered .
And she brought forth her firstborn son , and wrapped him in swaddling clothes , and laid him in a manger ; because there was no room for them in the inn .
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field , keeping watch over their flock by night .
And , lo , the angel of the Lord came upon them , and the glory of the Lord shone round about them : and they were sore afraid .
And the angel said unto them , Fear not : for , behold , I bring you good tidings of great joy , which shall be to all people .
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour , which is Christ the Lord .
And this shall be a sign unto you ; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes , lying in a manger .
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God , and saying .
Glory to God in the highest , and on earth peace , good will toward men .
And it came to pass , as the angels were gone away from them into heaven , the shepherds said one to another , Let us now go even unto Bethlehem , and see this thing which is come to pass , which the Lord hath made known unto us .
And they came with haste , and found Mary , and Joseph , and the babe lying in a manger .
And when they had seen it , they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child .
And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds .
But Mary kept all these things , and pondered them in her heart .
And the shepherds returned , glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen , as it was told unto them .
And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child , his name was called JESUS , which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb .
And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished , they brought him to Jerusalem , to present him to the Lord .
( As it is written in the law of the Lord , Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord ; )
And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord , A pair of turtledoves , or two young pigeons .
And , behold , there was a man in Jerusalem , whose name was Simeon ; and the same man was just and devout , waiting for the consolation of Israel : and the Holy Ghost was upon him .
And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost , that he should not see death , before he had seen the Lord ' s Christ .
And he came by the Spirit into the temple : and when the parents brought in the child Jesus , to do for him after the custom of the law .
Then took he him up in his arms , and blessed God , and said .
Lord , now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace , according to thy word .
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation .
Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people .
A light to lighten the Gentiles , and the glory of thy people Israel .
And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him .
And Simeon blessed them , and said unto Mary his mother , Behold , this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel ; and for a sign which shall be spoken against .
( Yea , a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also , ) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed .
And there was one Anna , a prophetess , the daughter of Phanuel , of the tribe of Aser : she was of a great age , and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity .
And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years , which departed not from the temple , but served God with fastings and prayers night and day .
And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord , and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem .
And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord , they returned into Galilee , to their own city Nazareth .
And the child grew , and waxed strong in spirit , filled with wisdom : and the grace of God was upon him .
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover .
And when he was twelve years old , they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast .
And when they had fulfilled the days , as they returned , the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem ; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it .
But they , supposing him to have been in the company , went a day ' s journey ; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance .
And when they found him not , they turned back again to Jerusalem , seeking him .
And it came to pass , that after three days they found him in the temple , sitting in the midst of the doctors , both hearing them , and asking them questions .
And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers .
And when they saw him , they were amazed : and his mother said unto him , Son , why hast thou thus dealt with us ? behold , thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing .
And he said unto them , How is it that ye sought me ? wist ye not that I must be about my Father ' s business ?
And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them .
And he went down with them , and came to Nazareth , and was subject unto them : but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart .
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature , and in favour with God and man .
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar , Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea , and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee , and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis , and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene .
Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests , the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness .
And he came into all the country about Jordan , preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins .
As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet , saying , The voice of one crying in the wilderness , Prepare ye the way of the Lord , make his paths straight .
Every valley shall be filled , and every mountain and hill shall be brought low ; and the crooked shall be made straight , and the rough ways shall be made smooth .
And all flesh shall see the salvation of God .
Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him , O generation of vipers , who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come ?
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance , and begin not to say within yourselves , We have Abraham to our father : for I say unto you , That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham .
And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees : every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down , and cast into the fire .
And the people asked him , saying , What shall we do then ?
He answereth and saith unto them , He that hath two coats , let him impart to him that hath none ; and he that hath meat , let him do likewise .
Then came also publicans to be baptized , and said unto him , Master , what shall we do ?
And he said unto them , Exact no more than that which is appointed you .
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him , saying , And what shall we do ? And he said unto them , Do violence to no man , neither accuse any falsely ; and be content with your wages .
And as the people were in expectation , and all men mused in their hearts of John , whether he were the Christ , or not .
John answered , saying unto them all , I indeed baptize you with water ; but one mightier than I cometh , the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose : he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire .
Whose fan is in his hand , and he will throughly purge his floor , and will gather the wheat into his garner ; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable .
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people .
But Herod the tetrarch , being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip ' s wife , and for all the evils which Herod had done .
Added yet this above all , that he shut up John in prison .
Now when all the people were baptized , it came to pass , that Jesus also being baptized , and praying , the heaven was opened .
And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him , and a voice came from heaven , which said , Thou art my beloved Son ; in thee I am well pleased .
And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age , being ( as was supposed ) the son of Joseph , which was the son of Heli .
Which was the son of Matthat , which was the son of Levi , which was the son of Melchi , which was the son of Janna , which was the son of Joseph .
Which was the son of Mattathias , which was the son of Amos , which was the son of Naum , which was the son of Esli , which was the son of Nagge .
Which was the son of Maath , which was the son of Mattathias , which was the son of Semei , which was the son of Joseph , which was the son of Juda .
Which was the son of Joanna , which was the son of Rhesa , which was the son of Zorobabel , which was the son of Salathiel , which was the son of Neri .
Which was the son of Melchi , which was the son of Addi , which was the son of Cosam , which was the son of Elmodam , which was the son of Er .
Which was the son of Jose , which was the son of Eliezer , which was the son of Jorim , which was the son of Matthat , which was the son of Levi .
Which was the son of Simeon , which was the son of Juda , which was the son of Joseph , which was the son of Jonan , which was the son of Eliakim .
Which was the son of Melea , which was the son of Menan , which was the son of Mattatha , which was the son of Nathan , which was the son of David .
Which was the son of Jesse , which was the son of Obed , which was the son of Booz , which was the son of Salmon , which was the son of Naasson .
Which was the son of Aminadab , which was the son of Aram , which was the son of Esrom , which was the son of Phares , which was the son of Juda .
Which was the son of Jacob , which was the son of Isaac , which was the son of Abraham , which was the son of Thara , which was the son of Nachor .
Which was the son of Saruch , which was the son of Ragau , which was the son of Phalec , which was the son of Heber , which was the son of Sala .
Which was the son of Cainan , which was the son of Arphaxad , which was the son of Sem , which was the son of Noe , which was the son of Lamech .
Which was the son of Mathusala , which was the son of Enoch , which was the son of Jared , which was the son of Maleleel , which was the son of Cainan .
Which was the son of Enos , which was the son of Seth , which was the son of Adam , which was the son of God .
And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan , and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness .
Being forty days tempted of the devil . And in those days he did eat nothing : and when they were ended , he afterward hungered .
And the devil said unto him , If thou be the Son of God , command this stone that it be made bread .
And Jesus answered him , saying , It is written , That man shall not live by bread alone , but by every word of God .
And the devil , taking him up into an high mountain , shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time .
And the devil said unto him , All this power will I give thee , and the glory of them : for that is delivered unto me ; and to whomsoever I will I give it .
If thou therefore wilt worship me , all shall be thine .
And Jesus answered and said unto him , Get thee behind me , Satan : for it is written , Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God , and him only shalt thou serve .
And he brought him to Jerusalem , and set him on a pinnacle of the temple , and said unto him , If thou be the Son of God , cast thyself down from hence .
For it is written , He shall give his angels charge over thee , to keep thee .
And in their hands they shall bear thee up , lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone .
And Jesus answering said unto him , It is said , Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God .
And when the devil had ended all the temptation , he departed from him for a season .
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee : and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about .
And he taught in their synagogues , being glorified of all .
And he came to Nazareth , where he had been brought up : and , as his custom was , he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day , and stood up for to read .
And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias . And when he had opened the book , he found the place where it was written .
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me , because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor ; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted , to preach deliverance to the captives , and recovering of sight to the blind , to set at liberty them that are bruised .
To preach the acceptable year of the Lord .
And he closed the book , and he gave it again to the minister , and sat down . And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him .
And he began to say unto them , This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears .
And all bare him witness , and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth . And they said , Is not this Joseph ' s son ?
And he said unto them , Ye will surely say unto me this proverb , Physician , heal thyself : whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum , do also here in thy country .
And he said , Verily I say unto you , No prophet is accepted in his own country .
But I tell you of a truth , many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias , when the heaven was shut up three years and six months , when great famine was throughout all the land .
But unto none of them was Elias sent , save unto Sarepta , a city of Sidon , unto a woman that was a widow .
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet ; and none of them was cleansed , saving Naaman the Syrian .
And all they in the synagogue , when they heard these things , were filled with wrath .
And rose up , and thrust him out of the city , and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built , that they might cast him down headlong .
But he passing through the midst of them went his way .
And came down to Capernaum , a city of Galilee , and taught them on the sabbath days .
And they were astonished at his doctrine : for his word was with power .
And in the synagogue there was a man , which had a spirit of an unclean devil , and cried out with a loud voice .
Saying , Let us alone ; what have we to do with thee , thou Jesus of Nazareth ? art thou come to destroy us ? I know thee who thou art ; the Holy One of God .
And Jesus rebuked him , saying , Hold thy peace , and come out of him . And when the devil had thrown him in the midst , he came out of him , and hurt him not .
And they were all amazed , and spake among themselves , saying , What a word is this ! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits , and they come out .
And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about .
And he arose out of the synagogue , and entered into Simon ' s house . And Simon ' s wife ' s mother was taken with a great fever ; and they besought him for her .
And he stood over her , and rebuked the fever ; and it left her : and immediately she arose and ministered unto them .
Now when the sun was setting , all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him ; and he laid his hands on every one of them , and healed them .
And devils also came out of many , crying out , and saying , Thou art Christ the Son of God . And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak : for they knew that he was Christ .
And when it was day , he departed and went into a desert place : and the people sought him , and came unto him , and stayed him , that he should not depart from them .
And he said unto them , I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also : for therefore am I sent .
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee .
And it came to pass , that , as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God , he stood by the lake of Gennesaret .
And saw two ships standing by the lake : but the fishermen were gone out of them , and were washing their nets .
And he entered into one of the ships , which was Simon ' s , and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land . And he sat down , and taught the people out of the ship .
Now when he had left speaking , he said unto Simon , Launch out into the deep , and let down your nets for a draught .
And Simon answering said unto him , Master , we have toiled all the night , and have taken nothing : nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net .
And when they had this done , they inclosed a great multitude of fishes : and their net brake .
And they beckoned unto their partners , which were in the other ship , that they should come and help them . And they came , and filled both the ships , so that they began to sink .
When Simon Peter saw it , he fell down at Jesus ' knees , saying , Depart from me ; for I am a sinful man , O Lord .
For he was astonished , and all that were with him , at the draught of the fishes which they had taken .
And so was also James , and John , the sons of Zebedee , which were partners with Simon . And Jesus said unto Simon , Fear not ; from henceforth thou shalt catch men .
And when they had brought their ships to land , they forsook all , and followed him .
And it came to pass , when he was in a certain city , behold a man full of leprosy : who seeing Jesus fell on his face , and besought him , saying , Lord , if thou wilt , thou canst make me clean .
And he put forth his hand , and touched him , saying , I will : be thou clean . And immediately the leprosy departed from him .
And he charged him to tell no man : but go , and shew thyself to the priest , and offer for thy cleansing , according as Moses commanded , for a testimony unto them .
But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him : and great multitudes came together to hear , and to be healed by him of their infirmities .
And he withdrew himself into the wilderness , and prayed .
And it came to pass on a certain day , as he was teaching , that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by , which were come out of every town of Galilee , and Judaea , and Jerusalem : and the power of the Lord was present to heal them .
And , behold , men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy : and they sought means to bring him in , and to lay him before him .
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude , they went upon the housetop , and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus .
And when he saw their faith , he said unto him , Man , thy sins are forgiven thee .
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason , saying , Who is this which speaketh blasphemies ? Who can forgive sins , but God alone ?
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts , he answering said unto them , What reason ye in your hearts ?
Whether is easier , to say , Thy sins be forgiven thee ; or to say , Rise up and walk ?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins , ( he said unto the sick of the palsy , ) I say unto thee , Arise , and take up thy couch , and go into thine house .
And immediately he rose up before them , and took up that whereon he lay , and departed to his own house , glorifying God .
And they were all amazed , and they glorified God , and were filled with fear , saying , We have seen strange things to day .
And after these things he went forth , and saw a publican , named Levi , sitting at the receipt of custom : and he said unto him , Follow me .
And he left all , rose up , and followed him .
And Levi made him a great feast in his own house : and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them .
But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples , saying , Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners ?
And Jesus answering said unto them , They that are whole need not a physician ; but they that are sick .
I came not to call the righteous , but sinners to repentance .
And they said unto him , Why do the disciples of John fast often , and make prayers , and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees ; but thine eat and drink ?
And he said unto them , Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast , while the bridegroom is with them ?
But the days will come , when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them , and then shall they fast in those days .
And he spake also a parable unto them ; No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old ; if otherwise , then both the new maketh a rent , and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the old .
And no man putteth new wine into old bottles ; else the new wine will burst the bottles , and be spilled , and the bottles shall perish .
But new wine must be put into new bottles ; and both are preserved .
No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new : for he saith , The old is better .
And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first , that he went through the corn fields ; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn , and did eat , rubbing them in their hands .
And certain of the Pharisees said unto them , Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days ?
And Jesus answering them said , Have ye not read so much as this , what David did , when himself was an hungred , and they which were with him .
How he went into the house of God , and did take and eat the shewbread , and gave also to them that were with him ; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone ?
And he said unto them , That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath .
And it came to pass also on another sabbath , that he entered into the synagogue and taught : and there was a man whose right hand was withered .
And the scribes and Pharisees watched him , whether he would heal on the sabbath day ; that they might find an accusation against him .
But he knew their thoughts , and said to the man which had the withered hand , Rise up , and stand forth in the midst . And he arose and stood forth .
Then said Jesus unto them , I will ask you one thing ; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good , or to do evil ? to save life , or to destroy it ?
And looking round about upon them all , he said unto the man , Stretch forth thy hand . And he did so : and his hand was restored whole as the other .
And they were filled with madness ; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus .
And it came to pass in those days , that he went out into a mountain to pray , and continued all night in prayer to God .
And when it was day , he called unto him his disciples : and of them he chose twelve , whom also he named apostles .
Simon , ( whom he also named Peter , ) and Andrew his brother , James and John , Philip and Bartholomew .
Matthew and Thomas , James the son of Alphaeus , and Simon called Zelotes .
And Judas the brother of James , and Judas Iscariot , which also was the traitor .
And he came down with them , and stood in the plain , and the company of his disciples , and a great multitude of people out of all Judaea and Jerusalem , and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon , which came to hear him , and to be healed of their diseases .
And they that were vexed with unclean spirits : and they were healed .
And the whole multitude sought to touch him : for there went virtue out of him , and healed them all .
And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples , and said , Blessed be ye poor : for yours is the kingdom of God .
Blessed are ye that hunger now : for ye shall be filled . Blessed are ye that weep now : for ye shall laugh .
Blessed are ye , when men shall hate you , and when they shall separate you from their company , and shall reproach you , and cast out your name as evil , for the Son of man ' s sake .
Rejoice ye in that day , and leap for joy : for , behold , your reward is great in heaven : for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets .
But woe unto you that are rich ! for ye have received your consolation .
Woe unto you that are full ! for ye shall hunger . Woe unto you that laugh now ! for ye shall mourn and weep .
Woe unto you , when all men shall speak well of you ! for so did their fathers to the false prophets .
But I say unto you which hear , Love your enemies , do good to them which hate you .
Bless them that curse you , and pray for them which despitefully use you .
And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other ; and him that taketh away thy cloke forbid not to take thy coat also .
Give to every man that asketh of thee ; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again .
And as ye would that men should do to you , do ye also to them likewise .
For if ye love them which love you , what thank have ye ? for sinners also love those that love them .
And if ye do good to them which do good to you , what thank have ye ? for sinners also do even the same .
And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive , what thank have ye ? for sinners also lend to sinners , to receive as much again .
But love ye your enemies , and do good , and lend , hoping for nothing again ; and your reward shall be great , and ye shall be the children of the Highest : for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil .
Be ye therefore merciful , as your Father also is merciful .
Judge not , and ye shall not be judged : condemn not , and ye shall not be condemned : forgive , and ye shall be forgiven .
Give , and it shall be given unto you ; good measure , pressed down , and shaken together , and running over , shall men give into your bosom . For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again .
And he spake a parable unto them , Can the blind lead the blind ? shall they not both fall into the ditch ?
The disciple is not above his master : but every one that is perfect shall be as his master .
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother ' s eye , but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye ?
Either how canst thou say to thy brother , Brother , let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye , when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye ? Thou hypocrite , cast out first the beam out of thine own eye , and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother ' s eye .
For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit ; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit .
For every tree is known by his own fruit . For of thorns men do not gather figs , nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes .
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good ; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil : for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh .
And why call ye me , Lord , Lord , and do not the things which I say ?
Whosoever cometh to me , and heareth my sayings , and doeth them , I will shew you to whom he is like .
He is like a man which built an house , and digged deep , and laid the foundation on a rock : and when the flood arose , the stream beat vehemently upon that house , and could not shake it : for it was founded upon a rock .
But he that heareth , and doeth not , is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth ; against which the stream did beat vehemently , and immediately it fell ; and the ruin of that house was great .
Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people , he entered into Capernaum .
And a certain centurion ' s servant , who was dear unto him , was sick , and ready to die .
And when he heard of Jesus , he sent unto him the elders of the Jews , beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant .
And when they came to Jesus , they besought him instantly , saying , That he was worthy for whom he should do this .
For he loveth our nation , and he hath built us a synagogue .
Then Jesus went with them . And when he was now not far from the house , the centurion sent friends to him , saying unto him , Lord , trouble not thyself : for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof .
Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee : but say in a word , and my servant shall be healed .
For I also am a man set under authority , having under me soldiers , and I say unto one , Go , and he goeth ; and to another , Come , and he cometh ; and to my servant , Do this , and he doeth it .
When Jesus heard these things , he marvelled at him , and turned him about , and said unto the people that followed him , I say unto you , I have not found so great faith , no , not in Israel .
And they that were sent , returning to the house , found the servant whole that had been sick .
And it came to pass the day after , that he went into a city called Nain ; and many of his disciples went with him , and much people .
Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city , behold , there was a dead man carried out , the only son of his mother , and she was a widow : and much people of the city was with her .
And when the Lord saw her , he had compassion on her , and said unto her , Weep not .
And he came and touched the bier : and they that bare him stood still . And he said , Young man , I say unto thee , Arise .
And he that was dead sat up , and began to speak . And he delivered him to his mother .
And there came a fear on all : and they glorified God , saying , That a great prophet is risen up among us ; and , That God hath visited his people .
And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judaea , and throughout all the region round about .
And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things .
And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus , saying , Art thou he that should come ? or look we for another ?
When the men were come unto him , they said , John Baptist hath sent us unto thee , saying , Art thou he that should come ? or look we for another ?
And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues , and of evil spirits ; and unto many that were blind he gave sight .
Then Jesus answering said unto them , Go your way , and tell John what things ye have seen and heard ; how that the blind see , the lame walk , the lepers are cleansed , the deaf hear , the dead are raised , to the poor the gospel is preached .
And blessed is he , whosoever shall not be offended in me .
And when the messengers of John were departed , he began to speak unto the people concerning John , What went ye out into the wilderness for to see ? A reed shaken with the wind ?
But what went ye out for to see ? A man clothed in soft raiment ? Behold , they which are gorgeously apparelled , and live delicately , are in kings ' courts .
But what went ye out for to see ? A prophet ? Yea , I say unto you , and much more than a prophet .
This is he , of whom it is written , Behold , I send my messenger before thy face , which shall prepare thy way before thee .
For I say unto you , Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist : but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he .
And all the people that heard him , and the publicans , justified God , being baptized with the baptism of John .
But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves , being not baptized of him .
And the Lord said , Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation ? and to what are they like ?
They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace , and calling one to another , and saying , We have piped unto you , and ye have not danced ; we have mourned to you , and ye have not wept .
For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine ; and ye say , He hath a devil .
The Son of man is come eating and drinking ; and ye say , Behold a gluttonous man , and a winebibber , a friend of publicans and sinners !
But wisdom is justified of all her children .
And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him . And he went into the Pharisee ' s house , and sat down to meat .
And , behold , a woman in the city , which was a sinner , when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee ' s house , brought an alabaster box of ointment .
And stood at his feet behind him weeping , and began to wash his feet with tears , and did wipe them with the hairs of her head , and kissed his feet , and anointed them with the ointment .
Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it , he spake within himself , saying , This man , if he were a prophet , would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him : for she is a sinner .
And Jesus answering said unto him , Simon , I have somewhat to say unto thee . And he saith , Master , say on .
There was a certain creditor which had two debtors : the one owed five hundred pence , and the other fifty .
And when they had nothing to pay , he frankly forgave them both . Tell me therefore , which of them will love him most ?
Simon answered and said , I suppose that he , to whom he forgave most . And he said unto him , Thou hast rightly judged .
And he turned to the woman , and said unto Simon , Seest thou this woman ? I entered into thine house , thou gavest me no water for my feet : but she hath washed my feet with tears , and wiped them with the hairs of her head .
Thou gavest me no kiss : but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet .
My head with oil thou didst not anoint : but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment .
Wherefore I say unto thee , Her sins , which are many , are forgiven ; for she loved much : but to whom little is forgiven , the same loveth little .
And he said unto her , Thy sins are forgiven .
And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves , Who is this that forgiveth sins also ?
And he said to the woman , Thy faith hath saved thee ; go in peace .
And it came to pass afterward , that he went throughout every city and village , preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God : and the twelve were with him .
And certain women , which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities , Mary called Magdalene , out of whom went seven devils .
And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod ' s steward , and Susanna , and many others , which ministered unto him of their substance .
And when much people were gathered together , and were come to him out of every city , he spake by a parable .
A sower went out to sow his seed : and as he sowed , some fell by the way side ; and it was trodden down , and the fowls of the air devoured it .
And some fell upon a rock ; and as soon as it was sprung up , it withered away , because it lacked moisture .
And some fell among thorns ; and the thorns sprang up with it , and choked it .
And other fell on good ground , and sprang up , and bare fruit an hundredfold . And when he had said these things , he cried , He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
And his disciples asked him , saying , What might this parable be ?
And he said , Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God : but to others in parables ; that seeing they might not see , and hearing they might not understand .
Now the parable is this : The seed is the word of God .
Those by the way side are they that hear ; then cometh the devil , and taketh away the word out of their hearts , lest they should believe and be saved .
They on the rock are they , which , when they hear , receive the word with joy ; and these have no root , which for a while believe , and in time of temptation fall away .
And that which fell among thorns are they , which , when they have heard , go forth , and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life , and bring no fruit to perfection .
But that on the good ground are they , which in an honest and good heart , having heard the word , keep it , and bring forth fruit with patience .
No man , when he hath lighted a candle , covereth it with a vessel , or putteth it under a bed ; but setteth it on a candlestick , that they which enter in may see the light .
For nothing is secret , that shall not be made manifest ; neither any thing hid , that shall not be known and come abroad .
Take heed therefore how ye hear : for whosoever hath , to him shall be given ; and whosoever hath not , from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have .
Then came to him his mother and his brethren , and could not come at him for the press .
And it was told him by certain which said , Thy mother and thy brethren stand without , desiring to see thee .
And he answered and said unto them , My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God , and do it .
Now it came to pass on a certain day , that he went into a ship with his disciples : and he said unto them , Let us go over unto the other side of the lake . And they launched forth .
But as they sailed he fell asleep : and there came down a storm of wind on the lake ; and they were filled with water , and were in jeopardy .
And they came to him , and awoke him , saying , Master , master , we perish . Then he arose , and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water : and they ceased , and there was a calm .
And he said unto them , Where is your faith ? And they being afraid wondered , saying one to another , What manner of man is this ! for he commandeth even the winds and water , and they obey him .
And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes , which is over against Galilee .
And when he went forth to land , there met him out of the city a certain man , which had devils long time , and ware no clothes , neither abode in any house , but in the tombs .
When he saw Jesus , he cried out , and fell down before him , and with a loud voice said , What have I to do with thee , Jesus , thou Son of God most high ? I beseech thee , torment me not .
( For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man . For oftentimes it had caught him : and he was kept bound with chains and in fetters ; and he brake the bands , and was driven of the devil into the wilderness . )
And Jesus asked him , saying , What is thy name ? And he said , Legion : because many devils were entered into him .
And they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep .
And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the mountain : and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them . And he suffered them .
Then went the devils out of the man , and entered into the swine : and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake , and were choked .
When they that fed them saw what was done , they fled , and went and told it in the city and in the country .
Then they went out to see what was done ; and came to Jesus , and found the man , out of whom the devils were departed , sitting at the feet of Jesus , clothed , and in his right mind : and they were afraid .
They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed of the devils was healed .
Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them ; for they were taken with great fear : and he went up into the ship , and returned back again .
Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with him : but Jesus sent him away , saying .
Return to thine own house , and shew how great things God hath done unto thee . And he went his way , and published throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him .
And it came to pass , that , when Jesus was returned , the people gladly received him : for they were all waiting for him .
And , behold , there came a man named Jairus , and he was a ruler of the synagogue : and he fell down at Jesus ' feet , and besought him that he would come into his house .
For he had one only daughter , about twelve years of age , and she lay a dying . But as he went the people thronged him .
And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years , which had spent all her living upon physicians , neither could be healed of any .
Came behind him , and touched the border of his garment : and immediately her issue of blood stanched .
And Jesus said , Who touched me ? When all denied , Peter and they that were with him said , Master , the multitude throng thee and press thee , and sayest thou , Who touched me ?
And Jesus said , Somebody hath touched me : for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me .
And when the woman saw that she was not hid , she came trembling , and falling down before him , she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him , and how she was healed immediately .
And he said unto her , Daughter , be of good comfort : thy faith hath made thee whole ; go in peace .
While he yet spake , there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue ' s house , saying to him , Thy daughter is dead ; trouble not the Master .
But when Jesus heard it , he answered him , saying , Fear not : believe only , and she shall be made whole .
And when he came into the house , he suffered no man to go in , save Peter , and James , and John , and the father and the mother of the maiden .
And all wept , and bewailed her : but he said , Weep not ; she is not dead , but sleepeth .
And they laughed him to scorn , knowing that she was dead .
And he put them all out , and took her by the hand , and called , saying , Maid , arise .
And her spirit came again , and she arose straightway : and he commanded to give her meat .
And her parents were astonished : but he charged them that they should tell no man what was done .
Then he called his twelve disciples together , and gave them power and authority over all devils , and to cure diseases .
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God , and to heal the sick .
And he said unto them , Take nothing for your journey , neither staves , nor scrip , neither bread , neither money ; neither have two coats apiece .
And whatsoever house ye enter into , there abide , and thence depart .
And whosoever will not receive you , when ye go out of that city , shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them .
And they departed , and went through the towns , preaching the gospel , and healing every where .
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him : and he was perplexed , because that it was said of some , that John was risen from the dead .
And of some , that Elias had appeared ; and of others , that one of the old prophets was risen again .
And Herod said , John have I beheaded : but who is this , of whom I hear such things ? And he desired to see him .
And the apostles , when they were returned , told him all that they had done . And he took them , and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida .
And the people , when they knew it , followed him : and he received them , and spake unto them of the kingdom of God , and healed them that had need of healing .
And when the day began to wear away , then came the twelve , and said unto him , Send the multitude away , that they may go into the towns and country round about , and lodge , and get victuals : for we are here in a desert place .
But he said unto them , Give ye them to eat . And they said , We have no more but five loaves and two fishes ; except we should go and buy meat for all this people .
For they were about five thousand men . And he said to his disciples , Make them sit down by fifties in a company .
And they did so , and made them all sit down .
Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes , and looking up to heaven , he blessed them , and brake , and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude .
And they did eat , and were all filled : and there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets .
And it came to pass , as he was alone praying , his disciples were with him : and he asked them , saying , Whom say the people that I am ?
They answering said , John the Baptist ; but some say , Elias ; and others say , that one of the old prophets is risen again .
He said unto them , But whom say ye that I am ? Peter answering said , The Christ of God .
And he straitly charged them , and commanded them to tell no man that thing .
Saying , The Son of man must suffer many things , and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes , and be slain , and be raised the third day .
And he said to them all , If any man will come after me , let him deny himself , and take up his cross daily , and follow me .
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it : but whosoever will lose his life for my sake , the same shall save it .
For what is a man advantaged , if he gain the whole world , and lose himself , or be cast away ?
For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words , of him shall the Son of man be ashamed , when he shall come in his own glory , and in his Father ' s , and of the holy angels .
But I tell you of a truth , there be some standing here , which shall not taste of death , till they see the kingdom of God .
And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings , he took Peter and John and James , and went up into a mountain to pray .
And as he prayed , the fashion of his countenance was altered , and his raiment was white and glistering .
And , behold , there talked with him two men , which were Moses and Elias .
Who appeared in glory , and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem .
But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep : and when they were awake , they saw his glory , and the two men that stood with him .
And it came to pass , as they departed from him , Peter said unto Jesus , Master , it is good for us to be here : and let us make three tabernacles ; one for thee , and one for Moses , and one for Elias : not knowing what he said .
While he thus spake , there came a cloud , and overshadowed them : and they feared as they entered into the cloud .
And there came a voice out of the cloud , saying , This is my beloved Son : hear him .
And when the voice was past , Jesus was found alone . And they kept it close , and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen .
And it came to pass , that on the next day , when they were come down from the hill , much people met him .
And , behold , a man of the company cried out , saying , Master , I beseech thee , look upon my son : for he is mine only child .
And , lo , a spirit taketh him , and he suddenly crieth out ; and it teareth him that he foameth again , and bruising him hardly departeth from him .
And I besought thy disciples to cast him out ; and they could not .
And Jesus answering said , O faithless and perverse generation , how long shall I be with you , and suffer you ? Bring thy son hither .
And as he was yet a coming , the devil threw him down , and tare him . And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit , and healed the child , and delivered him again to his father .
And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God . But while they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did , he said unto his disciples .
Let these sayings sink down into your ears : for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men .
But they understood not this saying , and it was hid from them , that they perceived it not : and they feared to ask him of that saying .
Then there arose a reasoning among them , which of them should be greatest .
And Jesus , perceiving the thought of their heart , took a child , and set him by him .
And said unto them , Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receiveth me : and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me : for he that is least among you all , the same shall be great .
And John answered and said , Master , we saw one casting out devils in thy name ; and we forbad him , because he followeth not with us .
And Jesus said unto him , Forbid him not : for he that is not against us is for us .
And it came to pass , when the time was come that he should be received up , he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem .
And sent messengers before his face : and they went , and entered into a village of the Samaritans , to make ready for him .
And they did not receive him , because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem .
And when his disciples James and John saw this , they said , Lord , wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven , and consume them , even as Elias did ?
But he turned , and rebuked them , and said , Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of .
For the Son of man is not come to destroy men ' s lives , but to save them . And they went to another village .
And it came to pass , that , as they went in the way , a certain man said unto him , Lord , I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest .
And Jesus said unto him , Foxes have holes , and birds of the air have nests ; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head .
And he said unto another , Follow me . But he said , Lord , suffer me first to go and bury my father .
Jesus said unto him , Let the dead bury their dead : but go thou and preach the kingdom of God .
And another also said , Lord , I will follow thee ; but let me first go bid them farewell , which are at home at my house .
And Jesus said unto him , No man , having put his hand to the plough , and looking back , is fit for the kingdom of God .
After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also , and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place , whither he himself would come .
Therefore said he unto them , The harvest truly is great , but the labourers are few : pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest , that he would send forth labourers into his harvest .
Go your ways : behold , I send you forth as lambs among wolves .
Carry neither purse , nor scrip , nor shoes : and salute no man by the way .
And into whatsoever house ye enter , first say , Peace be to this house .
And if the son of peace be there , your peace shall rest upon it : if not , it shall turn to you again .
And in the same house remain , eating and drinking such things as they give : for the labourer is worthy of his hire . Go not from house to house .
And into whatsoever city ye enter , and they receive you , eat such things as are set before you .
And heal the sick that are therein , and say unto them , The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you .
But into whatsoever city ye enter , and they receive you not , go your ways out into the streets of the same , and say .
Even the very dust of your city , which cleaveth on us , we do wipe off against you : notwithstanding be ye sure of this , that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you .
But I say unto you , that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom , than for that city .
Woe unto thee , Chorazin ! woe unto thee , Bethsaida ! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon , which have been done in you , they had a great while ago repented , sitting in sackcloth and ashes .
But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment , than for you .
And thou , Capernaum , which art exalted to heaven , shalt be thrust down to hell .
He that heareth you heareth me ; and he that despiseth you despiseth me ; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me .
And the seventy returned again with joy , saying , Lord , even the devils are subject unto us through thy name .
And he said unto them , I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven .
Behold , I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions , and over all the power of the enemy : and nothing shall by any means hurt you .
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not , that the spirits are subject unto you ; but rather rejoice , because your names are written in heaven .
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit , and said , I thank thee , O Father , Lord of heaven and earth , that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent , and hast revealed them unto babes : even so , Father ; for so it seemed good in thy sight .
All things are delivered to me of my Father : and no man knoweth who the Son is , but the Father ; and who the Father is , but the Son , and he to whom the Son will reveal him .
And he turned him unto his disciples , and said privately , Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see .
For I tell you , that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see , and have not seen them ; and to hear those things which ye hear , and have not heard them .
And , behold , a certain lawyer stood up , and tempted him , saying , Master , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?
He said unto him , What is written in the law ? how readest thou ?
And he answering said , Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart , and with all thy soul , and with all thy strength , and with all thy mind ; and thy neighbour as thyself .
And he said unto him , Thou hast answered right : this do , and thou shalt live .
But he , willing to justify himself , said unto Jesus , And who is my neighbour ?
And Jesus answering said , A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho , and fell among thieves , which stripped him of his raiment , and wounded him , and departed , leaving him half dead .
And by chance there came down a certain priest that way : and when he saw him , he passed by on the other side .
And likewise a Levite , when he was at the place , came and looked on him , and passed by on the other side .
But a certain Samaritan , as he journeyed , came where he was : and when he saw him , he had compassion on him .
And went to him , and bound up his wounds , pouring in oil and wine , and set him on his own beast , and brought him to an inn , and took care of him .
And on the morrow when he departed , he took out two pence , and gave them to the host , and said unto him , Take care of him ; and whatsoever thou spendest more , when I come again , I will repay thee .
Which now of these three , thinkest thou , was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves ?
And he said , He that shewed mercy on him . Then said Jesus unto him , Go , and do thou likewise .
Now it came to pass , as they went , that he entered into a certain village : and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house .
And she had a sister called Mary , which also sat at Jesus ' feet , and heard his word .
But Martha was cumbered about much serving , and came to him , and said , Lord , dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone ? bid her therefore that she help me .
And Jesus answered and said unto her , Martha , Martha , thou art careful and troubled about many things .
But one thing is needful : and Mary hath chosen that good part , which shall not be taken away from her .
And it came to pass , that , as he was praying in a certain place , when he ceased , one of his disciples said unto him , Lord , teach us to pray , as John also taught his disciples .
And he said unto them , When ye pray , say , Our Father which art in heaven , Hallowed be thy name . Thy kingdom come . Thy will be done , as in heaven , so in earth .
Give us day by day our daily bread .
And forgive us our sins ; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us . And lead us not into temptation ; but deliver us from evil .
And he said unto them , Which of you shall have a friend , and shall go unto him at midnight , and say unto him , Friend , lend me three loaves .
For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me , and I have nothing to set before him ?
And he from within shall answer and say , Trouble me not : the door is now shut , and my children are with me in bed ; I cannot rise and give thee .
I say unto you , Though he will not rise and give him , because he is his friend , yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth .
And I say unto you , Ask , and it shall be given you ; seek , and ye shall find ; knock , and it shall be opened unto you .
For every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that seeketh findeth ; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened .
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father , will he give him a stone ? or if he ask a fish , will he for a fish give him a serpent ?
Or if he shall ask an egg , will he offer him a scorpion ?
If ye then , being evil , know how to give good gifts unto your children : how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him ?
And he was casting out a devil , and it was dumb . And it came to pass , when the devil was gone out , the dumb spake ; and the people wondered .
But some of them said , He casteth out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils .
And others , tempting him , sought of him a sign from heaven .
But he , knowing their thoughts , said unto them , Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation ; and a house divided against a house falleth .
If Satan also be divided against himself , how shall his kingdom stand ? because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub .
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils , by whom do your sons cast them out ? therefore shall they be your judges .
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils , no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you .
When a strong man armed keepeth his palace , his goods are in peace .
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him , and overcome him , he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted , and divideth his spoils .
He that is not with me is against me : and he that gathereth not with me scattereth .
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man , he walketh through dry places , seeking rest ; and finding none , he saith , I will return unto my house whence I came out .
And when he cometh , he findeth it swept and garnished .
Then goeth he , and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself ; and they enter in , and dwell there : and the last state of that man is worse than the first .
And it came to pass , as he spake these things , a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice , and said unto him , Blessed is the womb that bare thee , and the paps which thou hast sucked .
But he said , Yea rather , blessed are they that hear the word of God , and keep it .
And when the people were gathered thick together , he began to say , This is an evil generation : they seek a sign ; and there shall no sign be given it , but the sign of Jonas the prophet .
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites , so shall also the Son of man be to this generation .
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation , and condemn them : for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and , behold , a greater than Solomon is here .
The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation , and shall condemn it : for they repented at the preaching of Jonas ; and , behold , a greater than Jonas is here .
No man , when he hath lighted a candle , putteth it in a secret place , neither under a bushel , but on a candlestick , that they which come in may see the light .
The light of the body is the eye : therefore when thine eye is single , thy whole body also is full of light ; but when thine eye is evil , thy body also is full of darkness .
Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness .
If thy whole body therefore be full of light , having no part dark , the whole shall be full of light , as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light .
And as he spake , a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him : and he went in , and sat down to meat .
And when the Pharisee saw it , he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner .
And the Lord said unto him , Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter ; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness .
Ye fools , did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also ?
But rather give alms of such things as ye have ; and , behold , all things are clean unto you .
But woe unto you , Pharisees ! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs , and pass over judgment and the love of God : these ought ye to have done , and not to leave the other undone .
Woe unto you , Pharisees ! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues , and greetings in the markets .
Woe unto you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! for ye are as graves which appear not , and the men that walk over them are not aware of them .
Then answered one of the lawyers , and said unto him , Master , thus saying thou reproachest us also .
And he said , Woe unto you also , ye lawyers ! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne , and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers .
Woe unto you ! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets , and your fathers killed them .
Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers : for they indeed killed them , and ye build their sepulchres .
Therefore also said the wisdom of God , I will send them prophets and apostles , and some of them they shall slay and persecute .
That the blood of all the prophets , which was shed from the foundation of the world , may be required of this generation .
From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias , which perished between the altar and the temple : verily I say unto you , It shall be required of this generation .
Woe unto you , lawyers ! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge : ye entered not in yourselves , and them that were entering in ye hindered .
And as he said these things unto them , the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently , and to provoke him to speak of many things .
Laying wait for him , and seeking to catch something out of his mouth , that they might accuse him .
In the mean time , when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people , insomuch that they trode one upon another , he began to say unto his disciples first of all , Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees , which is hypocrisy .
For there is nothing covered , that shall not be revealed ; neither hid , that shall not be known .
Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light ; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops .
And I say unto you my friends , Be not afraid of them that kill the body , and after that have no more that they can do .
But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear : Fear him , which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell ; yea , I say unto you , Fear him .
Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings , and not one of them is forgotten before God ?
But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered . Fear not therefore : ye are of more value than many sparrows .
Also I say unto you , Whosoever shall confess me before men , him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God .
But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God .
And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man , it shall be forgiven him : but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven .
And when they bring you unto the synagogues , and unto magistrates , and powers , take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer , or what ye shall say .
For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say .
And one of the company said unto him , Master , speak to my brother , that he divide the inheritance with me .
And he said unto him , Man , who made me a judge or a divider over you ?
And he said unto them , Take heed , and beware of covetousness : for a man ' s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth .
And he spake a parable unto them , saying , The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully .
And he thought within himself , saying , What shall I do , because I have no room where to bestow my fruits ?
And he said , This will I do : I will pull down my barns , and build greater ; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods .
And I will say to my soul , Soul , thou hast much goods laid up for many years ; take thine ease , eat , drink , and be merry .
But God said unto him , Thou fool , this night thy soul shall be required of thee : then whose shall those things be , which thou hast provided ?
So is he that layeth up treasure for himself , and is not rich toward God .
And he said unto his disciples , Therefore I say unto you , Take no thought for your life , what ye shall eat ; neither for the body , what ye shall put on .
The life is more than meat , and the body is more than raiment .
Consider the ravens : for they neither sow nor reap ; which neither have storehouse nor barn ; and God feedeth them : how much more are ye better than the fowls ?
And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit ?
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least , why take ye thought for the rest ?
Consider the lilies how they grow : they toil not , they spin not ; and yet I say unto you , that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these .
If then God so clothe the grass , which is to day in the field , and to morrow is cast into the oven ; how much more will he clothe you , O ye of little faith ?
And seek not ye what ye shall eat , or what ye shall drink , neither be ye of doubtful mind .
For all these things do the nations of the world seek after : and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things .
But rather seek ye the kingdom of God ; and all these things shall be added unto you .
Fear not , little flock ; for it is your Father ' s good pleasure to give you the kingdom .
Sell that ye have , and give alms ; provide yourselves bags which wax not old , a treasure in the heavens that faileth not , where no thief approacheth , neither moth corrupteth .
For where your treasure is , there will your heart be also .
Let your loins be girded about , and your lights burning .
And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord , when he will return from the wedding ; that when he cometh and knocketh , they may open unto him immediately .
Blessed are those servants , whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching : verily I say unto you , that he shall gird himself , and make them to sit down to meat , and will come forth and serve them .
And if he shall come in the second watch , or come in the third watch , and find them so , blessed are those servants .
And this know , that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come , he would have watched , and not have suffered his house to be broken through .
Be ye therefore ready also : for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not .
Then Peter said unto him , Lord , speakest thou this parable unto us , or even to all ?
And the Lord said , Who then is that faithful and wise steward , whom his lord shall make ruler over his household , to give them their portion of meat in due season ?
Blessed is that servant , whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing .
Of a truth I say unto you , that he will make him ruler over all that he hath .
But and if that servant say in his heart , My lord delayeth his coming ; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens , and to eat and drink , and to be drunken .
The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him , and at an hour when he is not aware , and will cut him in sunder , and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers .
And that servant , which knew his lord ' s will , and prepared not himself , neither did according to his will , shall be beaten with many stripes .
But he that knew not , and did commit things worthy of stripes , shall be beaten with few stripes . For unto whomsoever much is given , of him shall be much required : and to whom men have committed much , of him they will ask the more .
I am come to send fire on the earth ; and what will I , if it be already kindled ?
But I have a baptism to be baptized with ; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished !
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth ? I tell you , Nay ; but rather division .
For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided , three against two , and two against three .
The father shall be divided against the son , and the son against the father ; the mother against the daughter , and the daughter against the mother ; the mother in law against her daughter in law , and the daughter in law against her mother in law .
And he said also to the people , When ye see a cloud rise out of the west , straightway ye say , There cometh a shower ; and so it is .
And when ye see the south wind blow , ye say , There will be heat ; and it cometh to pass .
Ye hypocrites , ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth ; but how is it that ye do not discern this time ?
Yea , and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right ?
When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate , as thou art in the way , give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him ; lest he hale thee to the judge , and the judge deliver thee to the officer , and the officer cast thee into prison .
I tell thee , thou shalt not depart thence , till thou hast paid the very last mite .
There were present at that season some that told him of the Galilaeans , whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices .
And Jesus answering said unto them , Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans , because they suffered such things ?
I tell you , Nay : but , except ye repent , ye shall all likewise perish .
Or those eighteen , upon whom the tower in Siloam fell , and slew them , think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem ?
I tell you , Nay : but , except ye repent , ye shall all likewise perish .
He spake also this parable ; A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard ; and he came and sought fruit thereon , and found none .
Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard , Behold , these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree , and find none : cut it down ; why cumbereth it the ground ?
And he answering said unto him , Lord , let it alone this year also , till I shall dig about it , and dung it .
And if it bear fruit , well : and if not , then after that thou shalt cut it down .
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath .
And , behold , there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years , and was bowed together , and could in no wise lift up herself .
And when Jesus saw her , he called her to him , and said unto her , Woman , thou art loosed from thine infirmity .
And he laid his hands on her : and immediately she was made straight , and glorified God .
And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation , because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day , and said unto the people , There are six days in which men ought to work : in them therefore come and be healed , and not on the sabbath day .
The Lord then answered him , and said , Thou hypocrite , doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall , and lead him away to watering ?
And ought not this woman , being a daughter of Abraham , whom Satan hath bound , lo , these eighteen years , be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day ?
And when he had said these things , all his adversaries were ashamed : and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him .
Then said he , Unto what is the kingdom of God like ? and whereunto shall I resemble it ?
It is like a grain of mustard seed , which a man took , and cast into his garden ; and it grew , and waxed a great tree ; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it .
And again he said , Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God ?
It is like leaven , which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal , till the whole was leavened .
And he went through the cities and villages , teaching , and journeying toward Jerusalem .
Then said one unto him , Lord , are there few that be saved ? And he said unto them .
Strive to enter in at the strait gate : for many , I say unto you , will seek to enter in , and shall not be able .
When once the master of the house is risen up , and hath shut to the door , and ye begin to stand without , and to knock at the door , saying , Lord , Lord , open unto us ; and he shall answer and say unto you , I know you not whence ye are .
Then shall ye begin to say , We have eaten and drunk in thy presence , and thou hast taught in our streets .
But he shall say , I tell you , I know you not whence ye are ; depart from me , all ye workers of iniquity .
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth , when ye shall see Abraham , and Isaac , and Jacob , and all the prophets , in the kingdom of God , and you yourselves thrust out .
And they shall come from the east , and from the west , and from the north , and from the south , and shall sit down in the kingdom of God .
And , behold , there are last which shall be first , and there are first which shall be last .
The same day there came certain of the Pharisees , saying unto him , Get thee out , and depart hence : for Herod will kill thee .
And he said unto them , Go ye , and tell that fox , Behold , I cast out devils , and I do cures to day and to morrow , and the third day I shall be perfected .
Nevertheless I must walk to day , and to morrow , and the day following : for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem .
O Jerusalem , Jerusalem , which killest the prophets , and stonest them that are sent unto thee ; how often would I have gathered thy children together , as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings , and ye would not !
Behold , your house is left unto you desolate : and verily I say unto you , Ye shall not see me , until the time come when ye shall say , Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord .
And it came to pass , as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day , that they watched him .
And , behold , there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy .
And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees , saying , Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day ?
And they held their peace . And he took him , and healed him , and let him go .
And answered them , saying , Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit , and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day ?
And they could not answer him again to these things .
And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden , when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms ; saying unto them .
When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding , sit not down in the highest room ; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him .
And he that bade thee and him come and say to thee , Give this man place ; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room .
But when thou art bidden , go and sit down in the lowest room ; that when he that bade thee cometh , he may say unto thee , Friend , go up higher : then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee .
For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted .
Then said he also to him that bade him , When thou makest a dinner or a supper , call not thy friends , nor thy brethren , neither thy kinsmen , nor thy rich neighbours ; lest they also bid thee again , and a recompence be made thee .
But when thou makest a feast , call the poor , the maimed , the lame , the blind .
And thou shalt be blessed ; for they cannot recompense thee : for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just .
And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things , he said unto him , Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God .
Then said he unto him , A certain man made a great supper , and bade many .
And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden , Come ; for all things are now ready .
And they all with one consent began to make excuse . The first said unto him , I have bought a piece of ground , and I must needs go and see it : I pray thee have me excused .
And another said , I have bought five yoke of oxen , and I go to prove them : I pray thee have me excused .
And another said , I have married a wife , and therefore I cannot come .
So that servant came , and shewed his lord these things . Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant , Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city , and bring in hither the poor , and the maimed , and the halt , and the blind .
And the servant said , Lord , it is done as thou hast commanded , and yet there is room .
And the lord said unto the servant , Go out into the highways and hedges , and compel them to come in , that my house may be filled .
For I say unto you , That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper .
And there went great multitudes with him : and he turned , and said unto them .
If any man come to me , and hate not his father , and mother , and wife , and children , and brethren , and sisters , yea , and his own life also , he cannot be my disciple .
And whosoever doth not bear his cross , and come after me , cannot be my disciple .
For which of you , intending to build a tower , sitteth not down first , and counteth the cost , whether he have sufficient to finish it ?
Lest haply , after he hath laid the foundation , and is not able to finish it , all that behold it begin to mock him .
Saying , This man began to build , and was not able to finish .
Or what king , going to make war against another king , sitteth not down first , and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand ?
Or else , while the other is yet a great way off , he sendeth an ambassage , and desireth conditions of peace .
So likewise , whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath , he cannot be my disciple .
Salt is good : but if the salt have lost his savour , wherewith shall it be seasoned ?
It is neither fit for the land , nor yet for the dunghill ; but men cast it out . He that hath ears to hear , let him hear .
Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him .
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured , saying , This man receiveth sinners , and eateth with them .
And he spake this parable unto them , saying .
What man of you , having an hundred sheep , if he lose one of them , doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness , and go after that which is lost , until he find it ?
And when he hath found it , he layeth it on his shoulders , rejoicing .
And when he cometh home , he calleth together his friends and neighbours , saying unto them , Rejoice with me ; for I have found my sheep which was lost .
I say unto you , that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth , more than over ninety and nine just persons , which need no repentance .
Either what woman having ten pieces of silver , if she lose one piece , doth not light a candle , and sweep the house , and seek diligently till she find it ?
And when she hath found it , she calleth her friends and her neighbours together , saying , Rejoice with me ; for I have found the piece which I had lost .
Likewise , I say unto you , there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth .
And he said , A certain man had two sons .
And the younger of them said to his father , Father , give me the portion of goods that falleth to me . And he divided unto them his living .
And not many days after the younger son gathered all together , and took his journey into a far country , and there wasted his substance with riotous living .
And when he had spent all , there arose a mighty famine in that land ; and he began to be in want .
And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country ; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine .
And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat : and no man gave unto him .
And when he came to himself , he said , How many hired servants of my father ' s have bread enough and to spare , and I perish with hunger !
I will arise and go to my father , and will say unto him , Father , I have sinned against heaven , and before thee .
And am no more worthy to be called thy son : make me as one of thy hired servants .
And he arose , and came to his father . But when he was yet a great way off , his father saw him , and had compassion , and ran , and fell on his neck , and kissed him .
And the son said unto him , Father , I have sinned against heaven , and in thy sight , and am no more worthy to be called thy son .
But the father said to his servants , Bring forth the best robe , and put it on him ; and put a ring on his hand , and shoes on his feet .
And bring hither the fatted calf , and kill it ; and let us eat , and be merry .
For this my son was dead , and is alive again ; he was lost , and is found . And they began to be merry .
Now his elder son was in the field : and as he came and drew nigh to the house , he heard musick and dancing .
And he called one of the servants , and asked what these things meant .
And he said unto him , Thy brother is come ; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf , because he hath received him safe and sound .
And he was angry , and would not go in : therefore came his father out , and intreated him .
And he answering said to his father , Lo , these many years do I serve thee , neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment : and yet thou never gavest me a kid , that I might make merry with my friends .
But as soon as this thy son was come , which hath devoured thy living with harlots , thou hast killed for him the fatted calf .
And he said unto him , Son , thou art ever with me , and all that I have is thine .
It was meet that we should make merry , and be glad : for this thy brother was dead , and is alive again ; and was lost , and is found .
And he said also unto his disciples , There was a certain rich man , which had a steward ; and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods .
And he called him , and said unto him , How is it that I hear this of thee ? give an account of thy stewardship ; for thou mayest be no longer steward .
Then the steward said within himself , What shall I do ? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship : I cannot dig ; to beg I am ashamed .
I am resolved what to do , that , when I am put out of the stewardship , they may receive me into their houses .
So he called every one of his lord ' s debtors unto him , and said unto the first , How much owest thou unto my lord ?
And he said , An hundred measures of oil . And he said unto him , Take thy bill , and sit down quickly , and write fifty .
Then said he to another , And how much owest thou ? And he said , An hundred measures of wheat . And he said unto him , Take thy bill , and write fourscore .
And the lord commended the unjust steward , because he had done wisely : for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light .
And I say unto you , Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness ; that , when ye fail , they may receive you into everlasting habitations .
He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much : and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much .
If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon , who will commit to your trust the true riches ?
And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man ' s , who shall give you that which is your own ?
No servant can serve two masters : for either he will hate the one , and love the other ; or else he will hold to the one , and despise the other . Ye cannot serve God and mammon .
And the Pharisees also , who were covetous , heard all these things : and they derided him .
And he said unto them , Ye are they which justify yourselves before men ; but God knoweth your hearts : for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God .
The law and the prophets were until John : since that time the kingdom of God is preached , and every man presseth into it .
And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass , than one tittle of the law to fail .
Whosoever putteth away his wife , and marrieth another , committeth adultery : and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery .
There was a certain rich man , which was clothed in purple and fine linen , and fared sumptuously every day .
And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus , which was laid at his gate , full of sores .
And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man ' s table : moreover the dogs came and licked his sores .
And it came to pass , that the beggar died , and was carried by the angels into Abraham ' s bosom : the rich man also died , and was buried .
And in hell he lift up his eyes , being in torments , and seeth Abraham afar off , and Lazarus in his bosom .
And he cried and said , Father Abraham , have mercy on me , and send Lazarus , that he may dip the tip of his finger in water , and cool my tongue ; for I am tormented in this flame .
But Abraham said , Son , remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things , and likewise Lazarus evil things : but now he is comforted , and thou art tormented .
And beside all this , between us and you there is a great gulf fixed : so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot ; neither can they pass to us , that would come from thence .
Then he said , I pray thee therefore , father , that thou wouldest send him to my father ' s house .
For I have five brethren ; that he may testify unto them , lest they also come into this place of torment .
Abraham saith unto him , They have Moses and the prophets ; let them hear them .
And he said , Nay , father Abraham : but if one went unto them from the dead , they will repent .
And he said unto him , If they hear not Moses and the prophets , neither will they be persuaded , though one rose from the dead .
Then said he unto the disciples , It is impossible but that offences will come : but woe unto him , through whom they come !
It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck , and he cast into the sea , than that he should offend one of these little ones .
Take heed to yourselves : If thy brother trespass against thee , rebuke him ; and if he repent , forgive him .
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day , and seven times in a day turn again to thee , saying , I repent ; thou shalt forgive him .
And the apostles said unto the Lord , Increase our faith .
And the Lord said , If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed , ye might say unto this sycamine tree , Be thou plucked up by the root , and be thou planted in the sea ; and it should obey you .
But which of you , having a servant plowing or feeding cattle , will say unto him by and by , when he is come from the field , Go and sit down to meat ?
And will not rather say unto him , Make ready wherewith I may sup , and gird thyself , and serve me , till I have eaten and drunken ; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink ?
Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him ? I trow not .
So likewise ye , when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you , say , We are unprofitable servants : we have done that which was our duty to do .
And it came to pass , as he went to Jerusalem , that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee .
And as he entered into a certain village , there met him ten men that were lepers , which stood afar off .
And they lifted up their voices , and said , Jesus , Master , have mercy on us .
And when he saw them , he said unto them , Go shew yourselves unto the priests . And it came to pass , that , as they went , they were cleansed .
And one of them , when he saw that he was healed , turned back , and with a loud voice glorified God .
And fell down on his face at his feet , giving him thanks : and he was a Samaritan .
And Jesus answering said , Were there not ten cleansed ? but where are the nine ?
There are not found that returned to give glory to God , save this stranger .
And he said unto him , Arise , go thy way : thy faith hath made thee whole .
And when he was demanded of the Pharisees , when the kingdom of God should come , he answered them and said , The kingdom of God cometh not with observation .
Neither shall they say , Lo here ! or , lo there ! for , behold , the kingdom of God is within you .
And he said unto the disciples , The days will come , when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man , and ye shall not see it .
And they shall say to you , See here ; or , see there : go not after them , nor follow them .
For as the lightning , that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven , shineth unto the other part under heaven ; so shall also the Son of man be in his day .
But first must he suffer many things , and be rejected of this generation .
And as it was in the days of Noe , so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man .
They did eat , they drank , they married wives , they were given in marriage , until the day that Noe entered into the ark , and the flood came , and destroyed them all .
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot ; they did eat , they drank , they bought , they sold , they planted , they builded .
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven , and destroyed them all .
Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed .
In that day , he which shall be upon the housetop , and his stuff in the house , let him not come down to take it away : and he that is in the field , let him likewise not return back .
Remember Lot ' s wife .
Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it ; and whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it .
I tell you , in that night there shall be two men in one bed ; the one shall be taken , and the other shall be left .
Two women shall be grinding together ; the one shall be taken , and the other left .
Two men shall be in the field ; the one shall be taken , and the other left .
And they answered and said unto him , Where , Lord ? And he said unto them , Wheresoever the body is , thither will the eagles be gathered together .
And he spake a parable unto them to this end , that men ought always to pray , and not to faint .
Saying , There was in a city a judge , which feared not God , neither regarded man .
And there was a widow in that city ; and she came unto him , saying , Avenge me of mine adversary .
And he would not for a while : but afterward he said within himself , Though I fear not God , nor regard man .
Yet because this widow troubleth me , I will avenge her , lest by her continual coming she weary me .
And the Lord said , Hear what the unjust judge saith .
And shall not God avenge his own elect , which cry day and night unto him , though he bear long with them ?
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily . Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh , shall he find faith on the earth ?
And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous , and despised others .
Two men went up into the temple to pray ; the one a Pharisee , and the other a publican .
The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself , God , I thank thee , that I am not as other men are , extortioners , unjust , adulterers , or even as this publican .
I fast twice in the week , I give tithes of all that I possess .
And the publican , standing afar off , would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven , but smote upon his breast , saying , God be merciful to me a sinner .
I tell you , this man went down to his house justified rather than the other : for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted .
And they brought unto him also infants , that he would touch them : but when his disciples saw it , they rebuked them .
But Jesus called them unto him , and said , Suffer little children to come unto me , and forbid them not : for of such is the kingdom of God .
Verily I say unto you , Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein .
And a certain ruler asked him , saying , Good Master , what shall I do to inherit eternal life ?
And Jesus said unto him , Why callest thou me good ? none is good , save one , that is , God .
Thou knowest the commandments , Do not commit adultery , Do not kill , Do not steal , Do not bear false witness , Honour thy father and thy mother .
And he said , All these have I kept from my youth up .
Now when Jesus heard these things , he said unto him , Yet lackest thou one thing : sell all that thou hast , and distribute unto the poor , and thou shalt have treasure in heaven : and come , follow me .
And when he heard this , he was very sorrowful : for he was very rich .
And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful , he said , How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God !
For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle ' s eye , than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God .
And they that heard it said , Who then can be saved ?
And he said , The things which are impossible with men are possible with God .
Then Peter said , Lo , we have left all , and followed thee .
And he said unto them , Verily I say unto you , There is no man that hath left house , or parents , or brethren , or wife , or children , for the kingdom of God ' s sake .
Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time , and in the world to come life everlasting .
Then he took unto him the twelve , and said unto them , Behold , we go up to Jerusalem , and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished .
For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles , and shall be mocked , and spitefully entreated , and spitted on .
And they shall scourge him , and put him to death : and the third day he shall rise again .
And they understood none of these things : and this saying was hid from them , neither knew they the things which were spoken .
And it came to pass , that as he was come nigh unto Jericho , a certain blind man sat by the way side begging .
And hearing the multitude pass by , he asked what it meant .
And they told him , that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by .
And he cried , saying , Jesus , thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And they which went before rebuked him , that he should hold his peace : but he cried so much the more , Thou Son of David , have mercy on me .
And Jesus stood , and commanded him to be brought unto him : and when he was come near , he asked him .
Saying , What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee ? And he said , Lord , that I may receive my sight .
And Jesus said unto him , Receive thy sight : thy faith hath saved thee .
And immediately he received his sight , and followed him , glorifying God : and all the people , when they saw it , gave praise unto God .
And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho .
And , behold , there was a man named Zacchaeus , which was the chief among the publicans , and he was rich .
And he sought to see Jesus who he was ; and could not for the press , because he was little of stature .
And he ran before , and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see him : for he was to pass that way .
And when Jesus came to the place , he looked up , and saw him , and said unto him , Zacchaeus , make haste , and come down ; for to day I must abide at thy house .
And he made haste , and came down , and received him joyfully .
And when they saw it , they all murmured , saying , That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner .
And Zacchaeus stood , and said unto the Lord ; Behold , Lord , the half of my goods I give to the poor ; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation , I restore him fourfold .
And Jesus said unto him , This day is salvation come to this house , forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham .
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost .
And as they heard these things , he added and spake a parable , because he was nigh to Jerusalem , and because they thought that the kingdom of God should immediately appear .
He said therefore , A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom , and to return .
And he called his ten servants , and delivered them ten pounds , and said unto them , Occupy till I come .
But his citizens hated him , and sent a message after him , saying , We will not have this man to reign over us .
And it came to pass , that when he was returned , having received the kingdom , then he commanded these servants to be called unto him , to whom he had given the money , that he might know how much every man had gained by trading .
Then came the first , saying , Lord , thy pound hath gained ten pounds .
And he said unto him , Well , thou good servant : because thou hast been faithful in a very little , have thou authority over ten cities .
And the second came , saying , Lord , thy pound hath gained five pounds .
And he said likewise to him , Be thou also over five cities .
And another came , saying , Lord , behold , here is thy pound , which I have kept laid up in a napkin .
For I feared thee , because thou art an austere man : thou takest up that thou layedst not down , and reapest that thou didst not sow .
And he saith unto him , Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee , thou wicked servant . Thou knewest that I was an austere man , taking up that I laid not down , and reaping that I did not sow .
Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank , that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury ?
And he said unto them that stood by , Take from him the pound , and give it to him that hath ten pounds .
( And they said unto him , Lord , he hath ten pounds . )
For I say unto you , That unto every one which hath shall be given ; and from him that hath not , even that he hath shall be taken away from him .
But those mine enemies , which would not that I should reign over them , bring hither , and slay them before me .
And when he had thus spoken , he went before , ascending up to Jerusalem .
And it came to pass , when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany , at the mount called the mount of Olives , he sent two of his disciples .
Saying , Go ye into the village over against you ; in the which at your entering ye shall find a colt tied , whereon yet never man sat : loose him , and bring him hither .
And if any man ask you , Why do ye loose him ? thus shall ye say unto him , Because the Lord hath need of him .
And they that were sent went their way , and found even as he had said unto them .
And as they were loosing the colt , the owners thereof said unto them , Why loose ye the colt ?
And they said , The Lord hath need of him .
And they brought him to Jesus : and they cast their garments upon the colt , and they set Jesus thereon .
And as he went , they spread their clothes in the way .
And when he was come nigh , even now at the descent of the mount of Olives , the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen .
Saying , Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord : peace in heaven , and glory in the highest .
And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him , Master , rebuke thy disciples .
And he answered and said unto them , I tell you that , if these should hold their peace , the stones would immediately cry out .
And when he was come near , he beheld the city , and wept over it .
Saying , If thou hadst known , even thou , at least in this thy day , the things which belong unto thy peace ! but now they are hid from thine eyes .
For the days shall come upon thee , that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee , and compass thee round , and keep thee in on every side .
And shall lay thee even with the ground , and thy children within thee ; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another ; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation .
And he went into the temple , and began to cast out them that sold therein , and them that bought .
Saying unto them , It is written , My house is the house of prayer : but ye have made it a den of thieves .
And he taught daily in the temple . But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him .
And could not find what they might do : for all the people were very attentive to hear him .
And it came to pass , that on one of those days , as he taught the people in the temple , and preached the gospel , the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders .
And spake unto him , saying , Tell us , by what authority doest thou these things ? or who is he that gave thee this authority ?
And he answered and said unto them , I will also ask you one thing ; and answer me .
The baptism of John , was it from heaven , or of men ?
And they reasoned with themselves , saying , If we shall say , From heaven ; he will say , Why then believed ye him not ?
But and if we say , Of men ; all the people will stone us : for they be persuaded that John was a prophet .
And they answered , that they could not tell whence it was .
And Jesus said unto them , Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things .
Then began he to speak to the people this parable ; A certain man planted a vineyard , and let it forth to husbandmen , and went into a far country for a long time .
And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen , that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard : but the husbandmen beat him , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent another servant : and they beat him also , and entreated him shamefully , and sent him away empty .
And again he sent a third : and they wounded him also , and cast him out .
Then said the lord of the vineyard , What shall I do ? I will send my beloved son : it may be they will reverence him when they see him .
But when the husbandmen saw him , they reasoned among themselves , saying , This is the heir : come , let us kill him , that the inheritance may be ours .
So they cast him out of the vineyard , and killed him . What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them ?
He shall come and destroy these husbandmen , and shall give the vineyard to others . And when they heard it , they said , God forbid .
And he beheld them , and said , What is this then that is written , The stone which the builders rejected , the same is become the head of the corner ?
Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken ; but on whomsoever it shall fall , it will grind him to powder .
And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him ; and they feared the people : for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them .
And they watched him , and sent forth spies , which should feign themselves just men , that they might take hold of his words , that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor .
And they asked him , saying , Master , we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly , neither acceptest thou the person of any , but teachest the way of God truly .
Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar , or no ?
But he perceived their craftiness , and said unto them , Why tempt ye me ?
Shew me a penny . Whose image and superscription hath it ? They answered and said , Caesar ' s .
And he said unto them , Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be Caesar ' s , and unto God the things which be God ' s .
And they could not take hold of his words before the people : and they marvelled at his answer , and held their peace .
Then came to him certain of the Sadducees , which deny that there is any resurrection ; and they asked him .
Saying , Master , Moses wrote unto us , If any man ' s brother die , having a wife , and he die without children , that his brother should take his wife , and raise up seed unto his brother .
There were therefore seven brethren : and the first took a wife , and died without children .
And the second took her to wife , and he died childless .
And the third took her ; and in like manner the seven also : and they left no children , and died .
Last of all the woman died also .
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she ? for seven had her to wife .
And Jesus answering said unto them , The children of this world marry , and are given in marriage .
But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world , and the resurrection from the dead , neither marry , nor are given in marriage .
Neither can they die any more : for they are equal unto the angels ; and are the children of God , being the children of the resurrection .
Now that the dead are raised , even Moses shewed at the bush , when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob .
For he is not a God of the dead , but of the living : for all live unto him .
Then certain of the scribes answering said , Master , thou hast well said .
And after that they durst not ask him any question at all .
And he said unto them , How say they that Christ is David ' s son ?
And David himself saith in the book of Psalms , The LORD said unto my Lord , Sit thou on my right hand .
Till I make thine enemies thy footstool .
David therefore calleth him Lord , how is he then his son ?
Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples .
Beware of the scribes , which desire to walk in long robes , and love greetings in the markets , and the highest seats in the synagogues , and the chief rooms at feasts .
Which devour widows ' houses , and for a shew make long prayers : the same shall receive greater damnation .
And he looked up , and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury .
And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites .
And he said , Of a truth I say unto you , that this poor widow hath cast in more than they all .
For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God : but she of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had .
And as some spake of the temple , how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts , he said .
As for these things which ye behold , the days will come , in the which there shall not be left one stone upon another , that shall not be thrown down .
And they asked him , saying , Master , but when shall these things be ? and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass ?
And he said , Take heed that ye be not deceived : for many shall come in my name , saying , I am Christ ; and the time draweth near : go ye not therefore after them .
But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions , be not terrified : for these things must first come to pass ; but the end is not by and by .
Then said he unto them , Nation shall rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom .
And great earthquakes shall be in divers places , and famines , and pestilences ; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven .
But before all these , they shall lay their hands on you , and persecute you , delivering you up to the synagogues , and into prisons , being brought before kings and rulers for my name ' s sake .
And it shall turn to you for a testimony .
Settle it therefore in your hearts , not to meditate before what ye shall answer .
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom , which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist .
And ye shall be betrayed both by parents , and brethren , and kinsfolks , and friends ; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death .
And ye shall be hated of all men for my name ' s sake .
But there shall not an hair of your head perish .
In your patience possess ye your souls .
And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies , then know that the desolation thereof is nigh .
Then let them which are in Judaea flee to the mountains ; and let them which are in the midst of it depart out ; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto .
For these be the days of vengeance , that all things which are written may be fulfilled .
But woe unto them that are with child , and to them that give suck , in those days ! for there shall be great distress in the land , and wrath upon this people .
And they shall fall by the edge of the sword , and shall be led away captive into all nations : and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles , until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled .
And there shall be signs in the sun , and in the moon , and in the stars ; and upon the earth distress of nations , with perplexity ; the sea and the waves roaring .
Men ' s hearts failing them for fear , and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth : for the powers of heaven shall be shaken .
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory .
And when these things begin to come to pass , then look up , and lift up your heads ; for your redemption draweth nigh .
And he spake to them a parable ; Behold the fig tree , and all the trees .
When they now shoot forth , ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand .
So likewise ye , when ye see these things come to pass , know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand .
Verily I say unto you , This generation shall not pass away , till all be fulfilled .
Heaven and earth shall pass away : but my words shall not pass away .
And take heed to yourselves , lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting , and drunkenness , and cares of this life , and so that day come upon you unawares .
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth .
Watch ye therefore , and pray always , that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass , and to stand before the Son of man .
And in the day time he was teaching in the temple ; and at night he went out , and abode in the mount that is called the mount of Olives .
And all the people came early in the morning to him in the temple , for to hear him .
Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh , which is called the Passover .
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him ; for they feared the people .
Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot , being of the number of the twelve .
And he went his way , and communed with the chief priests and captains , how he might betray him unto them .
And they were glad , and covenanted to give him money .
And he promised , and sought opportunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude .
Then came the day of unleavened bread , when the passover must be killed .
And he sent Peter and John , saying , Go and prepare us the passover , that we may eat .
And they said unto him , Where wilt thou that we prepare ?
And he said unto them , Behold , when ye are entered into the city , there shall a man meet you , bearing a pitcher of water ; follow him into the house where he entereth in .
And ye shall say unto the goodman of the house , The Master saith unto thee , Where is the guestchamber , where I shall eat the passover with my disciples ?
And he shall shew you a large upper room furnished : there make ready .
And they went , and found as he had said unto them : and they made ready the passover .
And when the hour was come , he sat down , and the twelve apostles with him .
And he said unto them , With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer .
For I say unto you , I will not any more eat thereof , until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God .
And he took the cup , and gave thanks , and said , Take this , and divide it among yourselves .
For I say unto you , I will not drink of the fruit of the vine , until the kingdom of God shall come .
And he took bread , and gave thanks , and brake it , and gave unto them , saying , This is my body which is given for you : this do in remembrance of me .
Likewise also the cup after supper , saying , This cup is the new testament in my blood , which is shed for you .
But , behold , the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table .
And truly the Son of man goeth , as it was determined : but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed !
And they began to enquire among themselves , which of them it was that should do this thing .
And there was also a strife among them , which of them should be accounted the greatest .
And he said unto them , The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them ; and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors .
But ye shall not be so : but he that is greatest among you , let him be as the younger ; and he that is chief , as he that doth serve .
For whether is greater , he that sitteth at meat , or he that serveth ? is not he that sitteth at meat ? but I am among you as he that serveth .
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations .
And I appoint unto you a kingdom , as my Father hath appointed unto me .
That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom , and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel .
And the Lord said , Simon , Simon , behold , Satan hath desired to have you , that he may sift you as wheat .
But I have prayed for thee , that thy faith fail not : and when thou art converted , strengthen thy brethren .
And he said unto him , Lord , I am ready to go with thee , both into prison , and to death .
And he said , I tell thee , Peter , the cock shall not crow this day , before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me .
And he said unto them , When I sent you without purse , and scrip , and shoes , lacked ye any thing ? And they said , Nothing .
Then said he unto them , But now , he that hath a purse , let him take it , and likewise his scrip : and he that hath no sword , let him sell his garment , and buy one .
For I say unto you , that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me , And he was reckoned among the transgressors : for the things concerning me have an end .
And they said , Lord , behold , here are two swords . And he said unto them , It is enough .
And he came out , and went , as he was wont , to the mount of Olives ; and his disciples also followed him .
And when he was at the place , he said unto them , Pray that ye enter not into temptation .
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone ' s cast , and kneeled down , and prayed .
Saying , Father , if thou be willing , remove this cup from me : nevertheless not my will , but thine , be done .
And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven , strengthening him .
And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly : and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground .
And when he rose up from prayer , and was come to his disciples , he found them sleeping for sorrow .
And said unto them , Why sleep ye ? rise and pray , lest ye enter into temptation .
And while he yet spake , behold a multitude , and he that was called Judas , one of the twelve , went before them , and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him .
But Jesus said unto him , Judas , betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss ?
When they which were about him saw what would follow , they said unto him , Lord , shall we smite with the sword ?
And one of them smote the servant of the high priest , and cut off his right ear .
And Jesus answered and said , Suffer ye thus far . And he touched his ear , and healed him .
Then Jesus said unto the chief priests , and captains of the temple , and the elders , which were come to him , Be ye come out , as against a thief , with swords and staves ?
When I was daily with you in the temple , ye stretched forth no hands against me : but this is your hour , and the power of darkness .
Then took they him , and led him , and brought him into the high priest ' s house . And Peter followed afar off .
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall , and were set down together , Peter sat down among them .
But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire , and earnestly looked upon him , and said , This man was also with him .
And he denied him , saying , Woman , I know him not .
And after a little while another saw him , and said , Thou art also of them . And Peter said , Man , I am not .
And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed , saying , Of a truth this fellow also was with him : for he is a Galilaean .
And Peter said , Man , I know not what thou sayest . And immediately , while he yet spake , the cock crew .
And the Lord turned , and looked upon Peter . And Peter remembered the word of the Lord , how he had said unto him , Before the cock crow , thou shalt deny me thrice .
And Peter went out , and wept bitterly .
And the men that held Jesus mocked him , and smote him .
And when they had blindfolded him , they struck him on the face , and asked him , saying , Prophesy , who is it that smote thee ?
And many other things blasphemously spake they against him .
And as soon as it was day , the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together , and led him into their council , saying .
Art thou the Christ ? tell us . And he said unto them , If I tell you , ye will not believe .
And if I also ask you , ye will not answer me , nor let me go .
Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God .
Then said they all , Art thou then the Son of God ? And he said unto them , Ye say that I am .
And they said , What need we any further witness ? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth .
And the whole multitude of them arose , and led him unto Pilate .
And they began to accuse him , saying , We found this fellow perverting the nation , and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar , saying that he himself is Christ a King .
And Pilate asked him , saying , Art thou the King of the Jews ? And he answered him and said , Thou sayest it .
Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people , I find no fault in this man .
And they were the more fierce , saying , He stirreth up the people , teaching throughout all Jewry , beginning from Galilee to this place .
When Pilate heard of Galilee , he asked whether the man were a Galilaean .
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod ' s jurisdiction , he sent him to Herod , who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time .
And when Herod saw Jesus , he was exceeding glad : for he was desirous to see him of a long season , because he had heard many things of him ; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him .
Then he questioned with him in many words ; but he answered him nothing .
And the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused him .
And Herod with his men of war set him at nought , and mocked him , and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe , and sent him again to Pilate .
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together : for before they were at enmity between themselves .
And Pilate , when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people .
Said unto them , Ye have brought this man unto me , as one that perverteth the people : and , behold , I , having examined him before you , have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him .
No , nor yet Herod : for I sent you to him ; and , lo , nothing worthy of death is done unto him .
I will therefore chastise him , and release him .
( For of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast . )
And they cried out all at once , saying , Away with this man , and release unto us Barabbas .
( Who for a certain sedition made in the city , and for murder , was cast into prison . )
Pilate therefore , willing to release Jesus , spake again to them .
But they cried , saying , Crucify him , crucify him .
And he said unto them the third time , Why , what evil hath he done ? I have found no cause of death in him : I will therefore chastise him , and let him go .
And they were instant with loud voices , requiring that he might be crucified . And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed .
And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required .
And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison , whom they had desired ; but he delivered Jesus to their will .
And as they led him away , they laid hold upon one Simon , a Cyrenian , coming out of the country , and on him they laid the cross , that he might bear it after Jesus .
And there followed him a great company of people , and of women , which also bewailed and lamented him .
But Jesus turning unto them said , Daughters of Jerusalem , weep not for me , but weep for yourselves , and for your children .
For , behold , the days are coming , in the which they shall say , Blessed are the barren , and the wombs that never bare , and the paps which never gave suck .
Then shall they begin to say to the mountains , Fall on us ; and to the hills , Cover us .
For if they do these things in a green tree , what shall be done in the dry ?
And there were also two other , malefactors , led with him to be put to death .
And when they were come to the place , which is called Calvary , there they crucified him , and the malefactors , one on the right hand , and the other on the left .
Then said Jesus , Father , forgive them ; for they know not what they do . And they parted his raiment , and cast lots .
And the people stood beholding . And the rulers also with them derided him , saying , He saved others ; let him save himself , if he be Christ , the chosen of God .
And the soldiers also mocked him , coming to him , and offering him vinegar .
And saying , If thou be the king of the Jews , save thyself .
And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek , and Latin , and Hebrew , THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS .
And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him , saying , If thou be Christ , save thyself and us .
But the other answering rebuked him , saying , Dost not thou fear God , seeing thou art in the same condemnation ?
And we indeed justly ; for we receive the due reward of our deeds : but this man hath done nothing amiss .
And he said unto Jesus , Lord , remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom .
And Jesus said unto him , Verily I say unto thee , To day shalt thou be with me in paradise .
And it was about the sixth hour , and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour .
And the sun was darkened , and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst .
And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice , he said , Father , into thy hands I commend my spirit : and having said thus , he gave up the ghost .
Now when the centurion saw what was done , he glorified God , saying , Certainly this was a righteous man .
And all the people that came together to that sight , beholding the things which were done , smote their breasts , and returned .
And all his acquaintance , and the women that followed him from Galilee , stood afar off , beholding these things .
And , behold , there was a man named Joseph , a counsellor ; and he was a good man , and a just .
( The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them ; ) he was of Arimathaea , a city of the Jews : who also himself waited for the kingdom of God .
This man went unto Pilate , and begged the body of Jesus .
And he took it down , and wrapped it in linen , and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone , wherein never man before was laid .
And that day was the preparation , and the sabbath drew on .
And the women also , which came with him from Galilee , followed after , and beheld the sepulchre , and how his body was laid .
And they returned , and prepared spices and ointments ; and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment .
Now upon the first day of the week , very early in the morning , they came unto the sepulchre , bringing the spices which they had prepared , and certain others with them .
And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre .
And they entered in , and found not the body of the Lord Jesus .
And it came to pass , as they were much perplexed thereabout , behold , two men stood by them in shining garments .
And as they were afraid , and bowed down their faces to the earth , they said unto them , Why seek ye the living among the dead ?
He is not here , but is risen : remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee .
Saying , The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men , and be crucified , and the third day rise again .
And they remembered his words .
And returned from the sepulchre , and told all these things unto the eleven , and to all the rest .
It was Mary Magdalene , and Joanna , and Mary the mother of James , and other women that were with them , which told these things unto the apostles .
And their words seemed to them as idle tales , and they believed them not .
Then arose Peter , and ran unto the sepulchre ; and stooping down , he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves , and departed , wondering in himself at that which was come to pass .
And , behold , two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus , which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs .
And they talked together of all these things which had happened .
And it came to pass , that , while they communed together and reasoned , Jesus himself drew near , and went with them .
But their eyes were holden that they should not know him .
And he said unto them , What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another , as ye walk , and are sad ?
And the one of them , whose name was Cleopas , answering said unto him , Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem , and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days ?
And he said unto them , What things ? And they said unto him , Concerning Jesus of Nazareth , which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people .
And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death , and have crucified him .
But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel : and beside all this , to day is the third day since these things were done .
Yea , and certain women also of our company made us astonished , which were early at the sepulchre .
And when they found not his body , they came , saying , that they had also seen a vision of angels , which said that he was alive .
And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre , and found it even so as the women had said : but him they saw not .
Then he said unto them , O fools , and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken .
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things , and to enter into his glory ?
And beginning at Moses and all the prophets , he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself .
And they drew nigh unto the village , whither they went : and he made as though he would have gone further .
But they constrained him , saying , Abide with us : for it is toward evening , and the day is far spent . And he went in to tarry with them .
And it came to pass , as he sat at meat with them , he took bread , and blessed it , and brake , and gave to them .
And their eyes were opened , and they knew him ; and he vanished out of their sight .
And they said one to another , Did not our heart burn within us , while he talked with us by the way , and while he opened to us the scriptures ?
And they rose up the same hour , and returned to Jerusalem , and found the eleven gathered together , and them that were with them .
Saying , The Lord is risen indeed , and hath appeared to Simon .
And they told what things were done in the way , and how he was known of them in breaking of bread .
And as they thus spake , Jesus himself stood in the midst of them , and saith unto them , Peace be unto you .
But they were terrified and affrighted , and supposed that they had seen a spirit .
And he said unto them , Why are ye troubled ? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts ?
Behold my hands and my feet , that it is I myself : handle me , and see ; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones , as ye see me have .
And when he had thus spoken , he shewed them his hands and his feet .
And while they yet believed not for joy , and wondered , he said unto them , Have ye here any meat ?
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish , and of an honeycomb .
And he took it , and did eat before them .
And he said unto them , These are the words which I spake unto you , while I was yet with you , that all things must be fulfilled , which were written in the law of Moses , and in the prophets , and in the psalms , concerning me .
Then opened he their understanding , that they might understand the scriptures .
And said unto them , Thus it is written , and thus it behoved Christ to suffer , and to rise from the dead the third day .
And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations , beginning at Jerusalem .
And ye are witnesses of these things .
And , behold , I send the promise of my Father upon you : but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem , until ye be endued with power from on high .
And he led them out as far as to Bethany , and he lifted up his hands , and blessed them .
And it came to pass , while he blessed them , he was parted from them , and carried up into heaven .
And they worshipped him , and returned to Jerusalem with great joy .
And were continually in the temple , praising and blessing God . Amen .
In the beginning was the Word , and the Word was with God , and the Word was God .
The same was in the beginning with God .
All things were made by him ; and without him was not any thing made that was made .
In him was life ; and the life was the light of men .
And the light shineth in darkness ; and the darkness comprehended it not .
There was a man sent from God , whose name was John .
The same came for a witness , to bear witness of the Light , that all men through him might believe .
He was not that Light , but was sent to bear witness of that Light .
That was the true Light , which lighteth every man that cometh into the world .
He was in the world , and the world was made by him , and the world knew him not .
He came unto his own , and his own received him not .
But as many as received him , to them gave he power to become the sons of God , even to them that believe on his name .
Which were born , not of blood , nor of the will of the flesh , nor of the will of man , but of God .
And the Word was made flesh , and dwelt among us , ( and we beheld his glory , the glory as of the only begotten of the Father , ) full of grace and truth .
John bare witness of him , and cried , saying , This was he of whom I spake , He that cometh after me is preferred before me : for he was before me .
And of his fulness have all we received , and grace for grace .
For the law was given by Moses , but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ .
No man hath seen God at any time ; the only begotten Son , which is in the bosom of the Father , he hath declared him .
And this is the record of John , when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him , Who art thou ?
And he confessed , and denied not ; but confessed , I am not the Christ .
And they asked him , What then ? Art thou Elias ? And he saith , I am not . Art thou that prophet ? And he answered , No .
Then said they unto him , Who art thou ? that we may give an answer to them that sent us . What sayest thou of thyself ?
He said , I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness , Make straight the way of the Lord , as said the prophet Esaias .
And they which were sent were of the Pharisees .
And they asked him , and said unto him , Why baptizest thou then , if thou be not that Christ , nor Elias , neither that prophet ?
John answered them , saying , I baptize with water : but there standeth one among you , whom ye know not .
He it is , who coming after me is preferred before me , whose shoe ' s latchet I am not worthy to unloose .
These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan , where John was baptizing .
The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him , and saith , Behold the Lamb of God , which taketh away the sin of the world .
This is he of whom I said , After me cometh a man which is preferred before me : for he was before me .
And I knew him not : but that he should be made manifest to Israel , therefore am I come baptizing with water .
And John bare record , saying , I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove , and it abode upon him .
And I knew him not : but he that sent me to baptize with water , the same said unto me , Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending , and remaining on him , the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost .
And I saw , and bare record that this is the Son of God .
Again the next day after John stood , and two of his disciples .
And looking upon Jesus as he walked , he saith , Behold the Lamb of God !
And the two disciples heard him speak , and they followed Jesus .
Then Jesus turned , and saw them following , and saith unto them , What seek ye ? They said unto him , Rabbi , ( which is to say , being interpreted , Master , ) where dwellest thou ?
He saith unto them , Come and see . They came and saw where he dwelt , and abode with him that day : for it was about the tenth hour .
One of the two which heard John speak , and followed him , was Andrew , Simon Peter ' s brother .
He first findeth his own brother Simon , and saith unto him , We have found the Messias , which is , being interpreted , the Christ .
And he brought him to Jesus . And when Jesus beheld him , he said , Thou art Simon the son of Jona : thou shalt be called Cephas , which is by interpretation , A stone .
The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee , and findeth Philip , and saith unto him , Follow me .
Now Philip was of Bethsaida , the city of Andrew and Peter .
Philip findeth Nathanael , and saith unto him , We have found him , of whom Moses in the law , and the prophets , did write , Jesus of Nazareth , the son of Joseph .
And Nathanael said unto him , Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth ? Philip saith unto him , Come and see .
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him , and saith of him , Behold an Israelite indeed , in whom is no guile !
Nathanael saith unto him , Whence knowest thou me ? Jesus answered and said unto him , Before that Philip called thee , when thou wast under the fig tree , I saw thee .
Nathanael answered and saith unto him , Rabbi , thou art the Son of God ; thou art the King of Israel .
Jesus answered and said unto him , Because I said unto thee , I saw thee under the fig tree , believest thou ? thou shalt see greater things than these .
And he saith unto him , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Hereafter ye shall see heaven open , and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man .
And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee ; and the mother of Jesus was there .
And both Jesus was called , and his disciples , to the marriage .
And when they wanted wine , the mother of Jesus saith unto him , They have no wine .
Jesus saith unto her , Woman , what have I to do with thee ? mine hour is not yet come .
His mother saith unto the servants , Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it .
And there were set there six waterpots of stone , after the manner of the purifying of the Jews , containing two or three firkins apiece .
Jesus saith unto them , Fill the waterpots with water . And they filled them up to the brim .
And he saith unto them , Draw out now , and bear unto the governor of the feast . And they bare it .
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine , and knew not whence it was : ( but the servants which drew the water knew ; ) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom .
And saith unto him , Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when men have well drunk , then that which is worse : but thou hast kept the good wine until now .
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee , and manifested forth his glory ; and his disciples believed on him .
After this he went down to Capernaum , he , and his mother , and his brethren , and his disciples : and they continued there not many days .
And the Jews ' passover was at hand , and Jesus went up to Jerusalem .
And found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves , and the changers of money sitting .
And when he had made a scourge of small cords , he drove them all out of the temple , and the sheep , and the oxen ; and poured out the changers ' money , and overthrew the tables .
And said unto them that sold doves , Take these things hence ; make not my Father ' s house an house of merchandise .
And his disciples remembered that it was written , The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up .
Then answered the Jews and said unto him , What sign shewest thou unto us , seeing that thou doest these things ?
Jesus answered and said unto them , Destroy this temple , and in three days I will raise it up .
Then said the Jews , Forty and six years was this temple in building , and wilt thou rear it up in three days ?
But he spake of the temple of his body .
When therefore he was risen from the dead , his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them ; and they believed the scripture , and the word which Jesus had said .
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover , in the feast day , many believed in his name , when they saw the miracles which he did .
But Jesus did not commit himself unto them , because he knew all men .
And needed not that any should testify of man : for he knew what was in man .
There was a man of the Pharisees , named Nicodemus , a ruler of the Jews .
The same came to Jesus by night , and said unto him , Rabbi , we know that thou art a teacher come from God : for no man can do these miracles that thou doest , except God be with him .
Jesus answered and said unto him , Verily , verily , I say unto thee , Except a man be born again , he cannot see the kingdom of God .
Nicodemus saith unto him , How can a man be born when he is old ? can he enter the second time into his mother ' s womb , and be born ?
Jesus answered , Verily , verily , I say unto thee , Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit , he cannot enter into the kingdom of God .
That which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit .
Marvel not that I said unto thee , Ye must be born again .
The wind bloweth where it listeth , and thou hearest the sound thereof , but canst not tell whence it cometh , and whither it goeth : so is every one that is born of the Spirit .
Nicodemus answered and said unto him , How can these things be ?
Jesus answered and said unto him , Art thou a master of Israel , and knowest not these things ?
Verily , verily , I say unto thee , We speak that we do know , and testify that we have seen ; and ye receive not our witness .
If I have told you earthly things , and ye believe not , how shall ye believe , if I tell you of heavenly things ?
And no man hath ascended up to heaven , but he that came down from heaven , even the Son of man which is in heaven .
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness , even so must the Son of man be lifted up .
That whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have eternal life .
For God so loved the world , that he gave his only begotten Son , that whosoever believeth in him should not perish , but have everlasting life .
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world ; but that the world through him might be saved .
He that believeth on him is not condemned : but he that believeth not is condemned already , because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God .
And this is the condemnation , that light is come into the world , and men loved darkness rather than light , because their deeds were evil .
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light , neither cometh to the light , lest his deeds should be reproved .
But he that doeth truth cometh to the light , that his deeds may be made manifest , that they are wrought in God .
After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judaea ; and there he tarried with them , and baptized .
And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim , because there was much water there : and they came , and were baptized .
For John was not yet cast into prison .
Then there arose a question between some of John ' s disciples and the Jews about purifying .
And they came unto John , and said unto him , Rabbi , he that was with thee beyond Jordan , to whom thou barest witness , behold , the same baptizeth , and all men come to him .
John answered and said , A man can receive nothing , except it be given him from heaven .
Ye yourselves bear me witness , that I said , I am not the Christ , but that I am sent before him .
He that hath the bride is the bridegroom : but the friend of the bridegroom , which standeth and heareth him , rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom ' s voice : this my joy therefore is fulfilled .
He must increase , but I must decrease .
He that cometh from above is above all : he that is of the earth is earthly , and speaketh of the earth : he that cometh from heaven is above all .
And what he hath seen and heard , that he testifieth ; and no man receiveth his testimony .
He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true .
For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God : for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him .
The Father loveth the Son , and hath given all things into his hand .
He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life : and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him .
When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John .
( Though Jesus himself baptized not , but his disciples , )
He left Judaea , and departed again into Galilee .
And he must needs go through Samaria .
Then cometh he to a city of Samaria , which is called Sychar , near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph .
Now Jacob ' s well was there . Jesus therefore , being wearied with his journey , sat thus on the well : and it was about the sixth hour .
There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water : Jesus saith unto her , Give me to drink .
( For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat . )
Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him , How is it that thou , being a Jew , askest drink of me , which am a woman of Samaria ? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans .
Jesus answered and said unto her , If thou knewest the gift of God , and who it is that saith to thee , Give me to drink ; thou wouldest have asked of him , and he would have given thee living water .
The woman saith unto him , Sir , thou hast nothing to draw with , and the well is deep : from whence then hast thou that living water ?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob , which gave us the well , and drank thereof himself , and his children , and his cattle ?
Jesus answered and said unto her , Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again .
But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst ; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life .
The woman saith unto him , Sir , give me this water , that I thirst not , neither come hither to draw .
Jesus saith unto her , Go , call thy husband , and come hither .
The woman answered and said , I have no husband . Jesus said unto her , Thou hast well said , I have no husband .
For thou hast had five husbands ; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband : in that saidst thou truly .
The woman saith unto him , Sir , I perceive that thou art a prophet .
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain ; and ye say , that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship .
Jesus saith unto her , Woman , believe me , the hour cometh , when ye shall neither in this mountain , nor yet at Jerusalem , worship the Father .
Ye worship ye know not what : we know what we worship : for salvation is of the Jews .
But the hour cometh , and now is , when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth : for the Father seeketh such to worship him .
God is a Spirit : and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth .
The woman saith unto him , I know that Messias cometh , which is called Christ : when he is come , he will tell us all things .
Jesus saith unto her , I that speak unto thee am he .
And upon this came his disciples , and marvelled that he talked with the woman : yet no man said , What seekest thou ? or , Why talkest thou with her ?
The woman then left her waterpot , and went her way into the city , and saith to the men .
Come , see a man , which told me all things that ever I did : is not this the Christ ?
Then they went out of the city , and came unto him .
In the mean while his disciples prayed him , saying , Master , eat .
But he said unto them , I have meat to eat that ye know not of .
Therefore said the disciples one to another , Hath any man brought him ought to eat ?
Jesus saith unto them , My meat is to do the will of him that sent me , and to finish his work .
Say not ye , There are yet four months , and then cometh harvest ? behold , I say unto you , Lift up your eyes , and look on the fields ; for they are white already to harvest .
And he that reapeth receiveth wages , and gathereth fruit unto life eternal : that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together .
And herein is that saying true , One soweth , and another reapeth .
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour : other men laboured , and ye are entered into their labours .
And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman , which testified , He told me all that ever I did .
So when the Samaritans were come unto him , they besought him that he would tarry with them : and he abode there two days .
And many more believed because of his own word .
And said unto the woman , Now we believe , not because of thy saying : for we have heard him ourselves , and know that this is indeed the Christ , the Saviour of the world .
Now after two days he departed thence , and went into Galilee .
For Jesus himself testified , that a prophet hath no honour in his own country .
Then when he was come into Galilee , the Galilaeans received him , having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast : for they also went unto the feast .
So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee , where he made the water wine . And there was a certain nobleman , whose son was sick at Capernaum .
When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judaea into Galilee , he went unto him , and besought him that he would come down , and heal his son : for he was at the point of death .
Then said Jesus unto him , Except ye see signs and wonders , ye will not believe .
The nobleman saith unto him , Sir , come down ere my child die .
Jesus saith unto him , Go thy way ; thy son liveth . And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him , and he went his way .
And as he was now going down , his servants met him , and told him , saying , Thy son liveth .
Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend . And they said unto him , Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him .
So the father knew that it was at the same hour , in the which Jesus said unto him , Thy son liveth : and himself believed , and his whole house .
This is again the second miracle that Jesus did , when he was come out of Judaea into Galilee .
After this there was a feast of the Jews ; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem .
Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool , which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda , having five porches .
In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk , of blind , halt , withered , waiting for the moving of the water .
For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool , and troubled the water : whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had .
And a certain man was there , which had an infirmity thirty and eight years .
When Jesus saw him lie , and knew that he had been now a long time in that case , he saith unto him , Wilt thou be made whole ?
The impotent man answered him , Sir , I have no man , when the water is troubled , to put me into the pool : but while I am coming , another steppeth down before me .
Jesus saith unto him , Rise , take up thy bed , and walk .
And immediately the man was made whole , and took up his bed , and walked : and on the same day was the sabbath .
The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured , It is the sabbath day : it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed .
He answered them , He that made me whole , the same said unto me , Take up thy bed , and walk .
Then asked they him , What man is that which said unto thee , Take up thy bed , and walk ?
And he that was healed wist not who it was : for Jesus had conveyed himself away , a multitude being in that place .
Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple , and said unto him , Behold , thou art made whole : sin no more , lest a worse thing come unto thee .
The man departed , and told the Jews that it was Jesus , which had made him whole .
And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus , and sought to slay him , because he had done these things on the sabbath day .
But Jesus answered them , My Father worketh hitherto , and I work .
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him , because he not only had broken the sabbath , but said also that God was his Father , making himself equal with God .
Then answered Jesus and said unto them , Verily , verily , I say unto you , The Son can do nothing of himself , but what he seeth the Father do : for what things soever he doeth , these also doeth the Son likewise .
For the Father loveth the Son , and sheweth him all things that himself doeth : and he will shew him greater works than these , that ye may marvel .
For as the Father raiseth up the dead , and quickeneth them ; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will .
For the Father judgeth no man , but hath committed all judgment unto the Son .
That all men should honour the Son , even as they honour the Father . He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that heareth my word , and believeth on him that sent me , hath everlasting life , and shall not come into condemnation ; but is passed from death unto life .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , The hour is coming , and now is , when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God : and they that hear shall live .
For as the Father hath life in himself ; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself .
And hath given him authority to execute judgment also , because he is the Son of man .
Marvel not at this : for the hour is coming , in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice .
And shall come forth ; they that have done good , unto the resurrection of life ; and they that have done evil , unto the resurrection of damnation .
I can of mine own self do nothing : as I hear , I judge : and my judgment is just ; because I seek not mine own will , but the will of the Father which hath sent me .
If I bear witness of myself , my witness is not true .
There is another that beareth witness of me ; and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true .
Ye sent unto John , and he bare witness unto the truth .
But I receive not testimony from man : but these things I say , that ye might be saved .
He was a burning and a shining light : and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light .
But I have greater witness than that of John : for the works which the Father hath given me to finish , the same works that I do , bear witness of me , that the Father hath sent me .
And the Father himself , which hath sent me , hath borne witness of me . Ye have neither heard his voice at any time , nor seen his shape .
And ye have not his word abiding in you : for whom he hath sent , him ye believe not .
Search the scriptures ; for in them ye think ye have eternal life : and they are they which testify of me .
And ye will not come to me , that ye might have life .
I receive not honour from men .
But I know you , that ye have not the love of God in you .
I am come in my Father ' s name , and ye receive me not : if another shall come in his own name , him ye will receive .
How can ye believe , which receive honour one of another , and seek not the honour that cometh from God only ?
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father : there is one that accuseth you , even Moses , in whom ye trust .
For had ye believed Moses , ye would have believed me : for he wrote of me .
But if ye believe not his writings , how shall ye believe my words ?
After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee , which is the sea of Tiberias .
And a great multitude followed him , because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased .
And Jesus went up into a mountain , and there he sat with his disciples .
And the passover , a feast of the Jews , was nigh .
When Jesus then lifted up his eyes , and saw a great company come unto him , he saith unto Philip , Whence shall we buy bread , that these may eat ?
And this he said to prove him : for he himself knew what he would do .
Philip answered him , Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them , that every one of them may take a little .
One of his disciples , Andrew , Simon Peter ' s brother , saith unto him .
There is a lad here , which hath five barley loaves , and two small fishes : but what are they among so many ?
And Jesus said , Make the men sit down . Now there was much grass in the place . So the men sat down , in number about five thousand .
And Jesus took the loaves ; and when he had given thanks , he distributed to the disciples , and the disciples to them that were set down ; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would .
When they were filled , he said unto his disciples , Gather up the fragments that remain , that nothing be lost .
Therefore they gathered them together , and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves , which remained over and above unto them that had eaten .
Then those men , when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did , said , This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world .
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force , to make him a king , he departed again into a mountain himself alone .
And when even was now come , his disciples went down unto the sea .
And entered into a ship , and went over the sea toward Capernaum . And it was now dark , and Jesus was not come to them .
And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew .
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs , they see Jesus walking on the sea , and drawing nigh unto the ship : and they were afraid .
But he saith unto them , It is I ; be not afraid .
Then they willingly received him into the ship : and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went .
The day following , when the people which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there , save that one whereinto his disciples were entered , and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat , but that his disciples were gone away alone .
( Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat bread , after that the Lord had given thanks : )
When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there , neither his disciples , they also took shipping , and came to Capernaum , seeking for Jesus .
And when they had found him on the other side of the sea , they said unto him , Rabbi , when camest thou hither ?
Jesus answered them and said , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Ye seek me , not because ye saw the miracles , but because ye did eat of the loaves , and were filled .
Labour not for the meat which perisheth , but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life , which the Son of man shall give unto you : for him hath God the Father sealed .
Then said they unto him , What shall we do , that we might work the works of God ?
Jesus answered and said unto them , This is the work of God , that ye believe on him whom he hath sent .
They said therefore unto him , What sign shewest thou then , that we may see , and believe thee ? what dost thou work ?
Our fathers did eat manna in the desert ; as it is written , He gave them bread from heaven to eat .
Then Jesus said unto them , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Moses gave you not that bread from heaven ; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven .
For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven , and giveth life unto the world .
Then said they unto him , Lord , evermore give us this bread .
And Jesus said unto them , I am the bread of life : he that cometh to me shall never hunger ; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst .
But I said unto you , That ye also have seen me , and believe not .
All that the Father giveth me shall come to me ; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out .
For I came down from heaven , not to do mine own will , but the will of him that sent me .
And this is the Father ' s will which hath sent me , that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing , but should raise it up again at the last day .
And this is the will of him that sent me , that every one which seeth the Son , and believeth on him , may have everlasting life : and I will raise him up at the last day .
The Jews then murmured at him , because he said , I am the bread which came down from heaven .
And they said , Is not this Jesus , the son of Joseph , whose father and mother we know ? how is it then that he saith , I came down from heaven ?
Jesus therefore answered and said unto them , Murmur not among yourselves .
No man can come to me , except the Father which hath sent me draw him : and I will raise him up at the last day .
It is written in the prophets , And they shall be all taught of God . Every man therefore that hath heard , and hath learned of the Father , cometh unto me .
Not that any man hath seen the Father , save he which is of God , he hath seen the Father .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that believeth on me hath everlasting life .
I am that bread of life .
Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness , and are dead .
This is the bread which cometh down from heaven , that a man may eat thereof , and not die .
I am the living bread which came down from heaven : if any man eat of this bread , he shall live for ever : and the bread that I will give is my flesh , which I will give for the life of the world .
The Jews therefore strove among themselves , saying , How can this man give us his flesh to eat ?
Then Jesus said unto them , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man , and drink his blood , ye have no life in you .
Whoso eateth my flesh , and drinketh my blood , hath eternal life ; and I will raise him up at the last day .
For my flesh is meat indeed , and my blood is drink indeed .
He that eateth my flesh , and drinketh my blood , dwelleth in me , and I in him .
As the living Father hath sent me , and I live by the Father : so he that eateth me , even he shall live by me .
This is that bread which came down from heaven : not as your fathers did eat manna , and are dead : he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever .
These things said he in the synagogue , as he taught in Capernaum .
Many therefore of his disciples , when they had heard this , said , This is an hard saying ; who can hear it ?
When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it , he said unto them , Doth this offend you ?
What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before ?
It is the spirit that quickeneth ; the flesh profiteth nothing : the words that I speak unto you , they are spirit , and they are life .
But there are some of you that believe not . For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not , and who should betray him .
And he said , Therefore said I unto you , that no man can come unto me , except it were given unto him of my Father .
From that time many of his disciples went back , and walked no more with him .
Then said Jesus unto the twelve , Will ye also go away ?
Then Simon Peter answered him , Lord , to whom shall we go ? thou hast the words of eternal life .
And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ , the Son of the living God .
Jesus answered them , Have not I chosen you twelve , and one of you is a devil ?
He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon : for he it was that should betray him , being one of the twelve .
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee : for he would not walk in Jewry , because the Jews sought to kill him .
Now the Jews ' feast of tabernacles was at hand .
His brethren therefore said unto him , Depart hence , and go into Judaea , that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest .
For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret , and he himself seeketh to be known openly . If thou do these things , shew thyself to the world .
For neither did his brethren believe in him .
Then Jesus said unto them , My time is not yet come : but your time is alway ready .
The world cannot hate you ; but me it hateth , because I testify of it , that the works thereof are evil .
Go ye up unto this feast : I go not up yet unto this feast ; for my time is not yet full come .
When he had said these words unto them , he abode still in Galilee .
But when his brethren were gone up , then went he also up unto the feast , not openly , but as it were in secret .
Then the Jews sought him at the feast , and said , Where is he ?
And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him : for some said , He is a good man : others said , Nay ; but he deceiveth the people .
Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews .
Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple , and taught .
And the Jews marvelled , saying , How knoweth this man letters , having never learned ?
Jesus answered them , and said , My doctrine is not mine , but his that sent me .
If any man will do his will , he shall know of the doctrine , whether it be of God , or whether I speak of myself .
He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory : but he that seeketh his glory that sent him , the same is true , and no unrighteousness is in him .
Did not Moses give you the law , and yet none of you keepeth the law ? Why go ye about to kill me ?
The people answered and said , Thou hast a devil : who goeth about to kill thee ?
Jesus answered and said unto them , I have done one work , and ye all marvel .
Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision ; ( not because it is of Moses , but of the fathers ; ) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man .
If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision , that the law of Moses should not be broken ; are ye angry at me , because I have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day ?
Judge not according to the appearance , but judge righteous judgment .
Then said some of them of Jerusalem , Is not this he , whom they seek to kill ?
But , lo , he speaketh boldly , and they say nothing unto him . Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ ?
Howbeit we know this man whence he is : but when Christ cometh , no man knoweth whence he is .
Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught , saying , Ye both know me , and ye know whence I am : and I am not come of myself , but he that sent me is true , whom ye know not .
But I know him : for I am from him , and he hath sent me .
Then they sought to take him : but no man laid hands on him , because his hour was not yet come .
And many of the people believed on him , and said , When Christ cometh , will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done ?
The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him ; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him .
Then said Jesus unto them , Yet a little while am I with you , and then I go unto him that sent me .
Ye shall seek me , and shall not find me : and where I am , thither ye cannot come .
Then said the Jews among themselves , Whither will he go , that we shall not find him ? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles , and teach the Gentiles ?
What manner of saying is this that he said , Ye shall seek me , and shall not find me : and where I am , thither ye cannot come ?
In the last day , that great day of the feast , Jesus stood and cried , saying , If any man thirst , let him come unto me , and drink .
He that believeth on me , as the scripture hath said , out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water .
( But this spake he of the Spirit , which they that believe on him should receive : for the Holy Ghost was not yet given ; because that Jesus was not yet glorified . )
Many of the people therefore , when they heard this saying , said , Of a truth this is the Prophet .
Others said , This is the Christ . But some said , Shall Christ come out of Galilee ?
Hath not the scripture said , That Christ cometh of the seed of David , and out of the town of Bethlehem , where David was ?
So there was a division among the people because of him .
And some of them would have taken him ; but no man laid hands on him .
Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees ; and they said unto them , Why have ye not brought him ?
The officers answered , Never man spake like this man .
Then answered them the Pharisees , Are ye also deceived ?
Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him ?
But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed .
Nicodemus saith unto them , ( he that came to Jesus by night , being one of them , )
Doth our law judge any man , before it hear him , and know what he doeth ?
They answered and said unto him , Art thou also of Galilee ? Search , and look : for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet .
And every man went unto his own house .
Jesus went unto the mount of Olives .
And early in the morning he came again into the temple , and all the people came unto him ; and he sat down , and taught them .
And the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery ; and when they had set her in the midst .
They say unto him , Master , this woman was taken in adultery , in the very act .
Now Moses in the law commanded us , that such should be stoned : but what sayest thou ?
This they said , tempting him , that they might have to accuse him . But Jesus stooped down , and with his finger wrote on the ground , as though he heard them not .
So when they continued asking him , he lifted up himself , and said unto them , He that is without sin among you , let him first cast a stone at her .
And again he stooped down , and wrote on the ground .
And they which heard it , being convicted by their own conscience , went out one by one , beginning at the eldest , even unto the last : and Jesus was left alone , and the woman standing in the midst .
When Jesus had lifted up himself , and saw none but the woman , he said unto her , Woman , where are those thine accusers ? hath no man condemned thee ?
She said , No man , Lord . And Jesus said unto her , Neither do I condemn thee : go , and sin no more .
Then spake Jesus again unto them , saying , I am the light of the world : he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness , but shall have the light of life .
The Pharisees therefore said unto him , Thou bearest record of thyself ; thy record is not true .
Jesus answered and said unto them , Though I bear record of myself , yet my record is true : for I know whence I came , and whither I go ; but ye cannot tell whence I come , and whither I go .
Ye judge after the flesh ; I judge no man .
And yet if I judge , my judgment is true : for I am not alone , but I and the Father that sent me .
It is also written in your law , that the testimony of two men is true .
I am one that bear witness of myself , and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me .
Then said they unto him , Where is thy Father ? Jesus answered , Ye neither know me , nor my Father : if ye had known me , ye should have known my Father also .
These words spake Jesus in the treasury , as he taught in the temple : and no man laid hands on him ; for his hour was not yet come .
Then said Jesus again unto them , I go my way , and ye shall seek me , and shall die in your sins : whither I go , ye cannot come .
Then said the Jews , Will he kill himself ? because he saith , Whither I go , ye cannot come .
And he said unto them , Ye are from beneath ; I am from above : ye are of this world ; I am not of this world .
I said therefore unto you , that ye shall die in your sins : for if ye believe not that I am he , ye shall die in your sins .
Then said they unto him , Who art thou ? And Jesus saith unto them , Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning .
I have many things to say and to judge of you : but he that sent me is true ; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him .
They understood not that he spake to them of the Father .
Then said Jesus unto them , When ye have lifted up the Son of man , then shall ye know that I am he , and that I do nothing of myself ; but as my Father hath taught me , I speak these things .
And he that sent me is with me : the Father hath not left me alone ; for I do always those things that please him .
As he spake these words , many believed on him .
Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him , If ye continue in my word , then are ye my disciples indeed .
And ye shall know the truth , and the truth shall make you free .
They answered him , We be Abraham ' s seed , and were never in bondage to any man : how sayest thou , Ye shall be made free ?
Jesus answered them , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin .
And the servant abideth not in the house for ever : but the Son abideth ever .
If the Son therefore shall make you free , ye shall be free indeed .
I know that ye are Abraham ' s seed ; but ye seek to kill me , because my word hath no place in you .
I speak that which I have seen with my Father : and ye do that which ye have seen with your father .
They answered and said unto him , Abraham is our father . Jesus saith unto them , If ye were Abraham ' s children , ye would do the works of Abraham .
But now ye seek to kill me , a man that hath told you the truth , which I have heard of God : this did not Abraham .
Ye do the deeds of your father . Then said they to him , We be not born of fornication ; we have one Father , even God .
Jesus said unto them , If God were your Father , ye would love me : for I proceeded forth and came from God ; neither came I of myself , but he sent me .
Why do ye not understand my speech ? even because ye cannot hear my word .
Ye are of your father the devil , and the lusts of your father ye will do . He was a murderer from the beginning , and abode not in the truth , because there is no truth in him . When he speaketh a lie , he speaketh of his own : for he is a liar , and the father of it .
And because I tell you the truth , ye believe me not .
Which of you convinceth me of sin ? And if I say the truth , why do ye not believe me ?
He that is of God heareth God ' s words : ye therefore hear them not , because ye are not of God .
Then answered the Jews , and said unto him , Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan , and hast a devil ?
Jesus answered , I have not a devil ; but I honour my Father , and ye do dishonour me .
And I seek not mine own glory : there is one that seeketh and judgeth .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , If a man keep my saying , he shall never see death .
Then said the Jews unto him , Now we know that thou hast a devil . Abraham is dead , and the prophets ; and thou sayest , If a man keep my saying , he shall never taste of death .
Art thou greater than our father Abraham , which is dead ? and the prophets are dead : whom makest thou thyself ?
Jesus answered , If I honour myself , my honour is nothing : it is my Father that honoureth me ; of whom ye say , that he is your God .
Yet ye have not known him ; but I know him : and if I should say , I know him not , I shall be a liar like unto you : but I know him , and keep his saying .
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day : and he saw it , and was glad .
Then said the Jews unto him , Thou art not yet fifty years old , and hast thou seen Abraham ?
Jesus said unto them , Verily , verily , I say unto you , Before Abraham was , I am .
Then took they up stones to cast at him : but Jesus hid himself , and went out of the temple , going through the midst of them , and so passed by .
And as Jesus passed by , he saw a man which was blind from his birth .
And his disciples asked him , saying , Master , who did sin , this man , or his parents , that he was born blind ?
Jesus answered , Neither hath this man sinned , nor his parents : but that the works of God should be made manifest in him .
I must work the works of him that sent me , while it is day : the night cometh , when no man can work .
As long as I am in the world , I am the light of the world .
When he had thus spoken , he spat on the ground , and made clay of the spittle , and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay .
And said unto him , Go , wash in the pool of Siloam , ( which is by interpretation , Sent . ) He went his way therefore , and washed , and came seeing .
The neighbours therefore , and they which before had seen him that he was blind , said , Is not this he that sat and begged ?
Some said , This is he : others said , He is like him : but he said , I am he .
Therefore said they unto him , How were thine eyes opened ?
He answered and said , A man that is called Jesus made clay , and anointed mine eyes , and said unto me , Go to the pool of Siloam , and wash : and I went and washed , and I received sight .
Then said they unto him , Where is he ? He said , I know not .
They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind .
And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay , and opened his eyes .
Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight . He said unto them , He put clay upon mine eyes , and I washed , and do see .
Therefore said some of the Pharisees , This man is not of God , because he keepeth not the sabbath day . Others said , How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles ? And there was a division among them .
They say unto the blind man again , What sayest thou of him , that he hath opened thine eyes ? He said , He is a prophet .
But the Jews did not believe concerning him , that he had been blind , and received his sight , until they called the parents of him that had received his sight .
And they asked them , saying , Is this your son , who ye say was born blind ? how then doth he now see ?
His parents answered them and said , We know that this is our son , and that he was born blind .
But by what means he now seeth , we know not ; or who hath opened his eyes , we know not : he is of age ; ask him : he shall speak for himself .
These words spake his parents , because they feared the Jews : for the Jews had agreed already , that if any man did confess that he was Christ , he should be put out of the synagogue .
Therefore said his parents , He is of age ; ask him .
Then again called they the man that was blind , and said unto him , Give God the praise : we know that this man is a sinner .
He answered and said , Whether he be a sinner or no , I know not : one thing I know , that , whereas I was blind , now I see .
Then said they to him again , What did he to thee ? how opened he thine eyes ?
He answered them , I have told you already , and ye did not hear : wherefore would ye hear it again ? will ye also be his disciples ?
Then they reviled him , and said , Thou art his disciple ; but we are Moses ' disciples .
We know that God spake unto Moses : as for this fellow , we know not from whence he is .
The man answered and said unto them , Why herein is a marvellous thing , that ye know not from whence he is , and yet he hath opened mine eyes .
Now we know that God heareth not sinners : but if any man be a worshipper of God , and doeth his will , him he heareth .
Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind .
If this man were not of God , he could do nothing .
They answered and said unto him , Thou wast altogether born in sins , and dost thou teach us ? And they cast him out .
Jesus heard that they had cast him out ; and when he had found him , he said unto him , Dost thou believe on the Son of God ?
He answered and said , Who is he , Lord , that I might believe on him ?
And Jesus said unto him , Thou hast both seen him , and it is he that talketh with thee .
And he said , Lord , I believe . And he worshipped him .
And Jesus said , For judgment I am come into this world , that they which see not might see ; and that they which see might be made blind .
And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words , and said unto him , Are we blind also ?
Jesus said unto them , If ye were blind , ye should have no sin : but now ye say , We see ; therefore your sin remaineth .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold , but climbeth up some other way , the same is a thief and a robber .
But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep .
To him the porter openeth ; and the sheep hear his voice : and he calleth his own sheep by name , and leadeth them out .
And when he putteth forth his own sheep , he goeth before them , and the sheep follow him : for they know his voice .
And a stranger will they not follow , but will flee from him : for they know not the voice of strangers .
This parable spake Jesus unto them : but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them .
Then said Jesus unto them again , Verily , verily , I say unto you , I am the door of the sheep .
All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers : but the sheep did not hear them .
I am the door : by me if any man enter in , he shall be saved , and shall go in and out , and find pasture .
The thief cometh not , but for to steal , and to kill , and to destroy : I am come that they might have life , and that they might have it more abundantly .
I am the good shepherd : the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep .
But he that is an hireling , and not the shepherd , whose own the sheep are not , seeth the wolf coming , and leaveth the sheep , and fleeth : and the wolf catcheth them , and scattereth the sheep .
The hireling fleeth , because he is an hireling , and careth not for the sheep .
I am the good shepherd , and know my sheep , and am known of mine .
As the Father knoweth me , even so know I the Father : and I lay down my life for the sheep .
And other sheep I have , which are not of this fold : them also I must bring , and they shall hear my voice ; and there shall be one fold , and one shepherd .
Therefore doth my Father love me , because I lay down my life , that I might take it again .
No man taketh it from me , but I lay it down of myself . I have power to lay it down , and I have power to take it again . This commandment have I received of my Father .
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings .
And many of them said , He hath a devil , and is mad ; why hear ye him ?
Others said , These are not the words of him that hath a devil . Can a devil open the eyes of the blind ?
And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication , and it was winter .
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon ' s porch .
Then came the Jews round about him , and said unto him , How long dost thou make us to doubt ? If thou be the Christ , tell us plainly .
Jesus answered them , I told you , and ye believed not : the works that I do in my Father ' s name , they bear witness of me .
But ye believe not , because ye are not of my sheep , as I said unto you .
My sheep hear my voice , and I know them , and they follow me .
And I give unto them eternal life ; and they shall never perish , neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand .
My Father , which gave them me , is greater than all ; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father ' s hand .
I and my Father are one .
Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him .
Jesus answered them , Many good works have I shewed you from my Father ; for which of those works do ye stone me ?
The Jews answered him , saying , For a good work we stone thee not ; but for blasphemy ; and because that thou , being a man , makest thyself God .
Jesus answered them , Is it not written in your law , I said , Ye are gods ?
If he called them gods , unto whom the word of God came , and the scripture cannot be broken .
Say ye of him , whom the Father hath sanctified , and sent into the world , Thou blasphemest ; because I said , I am the Son of God ?
If I do not the works of my Father , believe me not .
But if I do , though ye believe not me , believe the works : that ye may know , and believe , that the Father is in me , and I in him .
Therefore they sought again to take him : but he escaped out of their hand .
And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized ; and there he abode .
And many resorted unto him , and said , John did no miracle : but all things that John spake of this man were true .
And many believed on him there .
Now a certain man was sick , named Lazarus , of Bethany , the town of Mary and her sister Martha .
( It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment , and wiped his feet with her hair , whose brother Lazarus was sick . )
Therefore his sisters sent unto him , saying , Lord , behold , he whom thou lovest is sick .
When Jesus heard that , he said , This sickness is not unto death , but for the glory of God , that the Son of God might be glorified thereby .
Now Jesus loved Martha , and her sister , and Lazarus .
When he had heard therefore that he was sick , he abode two days still in the same place where he was .
Then after that saith he to his disciples , Let us go into Judaea again .
His disciples say unto him , Master , the Jews of late sought to stone thee ; and goest thou thither again ?
Jesus answered , Are there not twelve hours in the day ? If any man walk in the day , he stumbleth not , because he seeth the light of this world .
But if a man walk in the night , he stumbleth , because there is no light in him .
These things said he : and after that he saith unto them , Our friend Lazarus sleepeth ; but I go , that I may awake him out of sleep .
Then said his disciples , Lord , if he sleep , he shall do well .
Howbeit Jesus spake of his death : but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in sleep .
Then said Jesus unto them plainly , Lazarus is dead .
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there , to the intent ye may believe ; nevertheless let us go unto him .
Then said Thomas , which is called Didymus , unto his fellowdisciples , Let us also go , that we may die with him .
Then when Jesus came , he found that he had lain in the grave four days already .
Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem , about fifteen furlongs off .
And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary , to comfort them concerning their brother .
Then Martha , as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming , went and met him : but Mary sat still in the house .
Then said Martha unto Jesus , Lord , if thou hadst been here , my brother had not died .
But I know , that even now , whatsoever thou wilt ask of God , God will give it thee .
Jesus saith unto her , Thy brother shall rise again .
Martha saith unto him , I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day .
Jesus said unto her , I am the resurrection , and the life : he that believeth in me , though he were dead , yet shall he live .
And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die . Believest thou this ?
She saith unto him , Yea , Lord : I believe that thou art the Christ , the Son of God , which should come into the world .
And when she had so said , she went her way , and called Mary her sister secretly , saying , The Master is come , and calleth for thee .
As soon as she heard that , she arose quickly , and came unto him .
Now Jesus was not yet come into the town , but was in that place where Martha met him .
The Jews then which were with her in the house , and comforted her , when they saw Mary , that she rose up hastily and went out , followed her , saying , She goeth unto the grave to weep there .
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was , and saw him , she fell down at his feet , saying unto him , Lord , if thou hadst been here , my brother had not died .
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping , and the Jews also weeping which came with her , he groaned in the spirit , and was troubled .
And said , Where have ye laid him ? They said unto him , Lord , come and see .
Jesus wept .
Then said the Jews , Behold how he loved him !
And some of them said , Could not this man , which opened the eyes of the blind , have caused that even this man should not have died ?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave . It was a cave , and a stone lay upon it .
Jesus said , Take ye away the stone . Martha , the sister of him that was dead , saith unto him , Lord , by this time he stinketh : for he hath been dead four days .
Jesus saith unto her , Said I not unto thee , that , if thou wouldest believe , thou shouldest see the glory of God ?
Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid . And Jesus lifted up his eyes , and said , Father , I thank thee that thou hast heard me .
And I knew that thou hearest me always : but because of the people which stand by I said it , that they may believe that thou hast sent me .
And when he thus had spoken , he cried with a loud voice , Lazarus , come forth .
And he that was dead came forth , bound hand and foot with graveclothes : and his face was bound about with a napkin . Jesus saith unto them , Loose him , and let him go .
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary , and had seen the things which Jesus did , believed on him .
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees , and told them what things Jesus had done .
Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council , and said , What do we ? for this man doeth many miracles .
If we let him thus alone , all men will believe on him : and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation .
And one of them , named Caiaphas , being the high priest that same year , said unto them , Ye know nothing at all .
Nor consider that it is expedient for us , that one man should die for the people , and that the whole nation perish not .
And this spake he not of himself : but being high priest that year , he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation .
And not for that nation only , but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad .
Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death .
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews ; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness , into a city called Ephraim , and there continued with his disciples .
And the Jews ' passover was nigh at hand : and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover , to purify themselves .
Then sought they for Jesus , and spake among themselves , as they stood in the temple , What think ye , that he will not come to the feast ?
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment , that , if any man knew where he were , he should shew it , that they might take him .
Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany , where Lazarus was which had been dead , whom he raised from the dead .
There they made him a supper ; and Martha served : but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him .
Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard , very costly , and anointed the feet of Jesus , and wiped his feet with her hair : and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment .
Then saith one of his disciples , Judas Iscariot , Simon ' s son , which should betray him .
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence , and given to the poor ?
This he said , not that he cared for the poor ; but because he was a thief , and had the bag , and bare what was put therein .
Then said Jesus , Let her alone : against the day of my burying hath she kept this .
For the poor always ye have with you ; but me ye have not always .
Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there : and they came not for Jesus ' sake only , but that they might see Lazarus also , whom he had raised from the dead .
But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death .
Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away , and believed on Jesus .
On the next day much people that were come to the feast , when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem .
Took branches of palm trees , and went forth to meet him , and cried , Hosanna : Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord .
And Jesus , when he had found a young ass , sat thereon ; as it is written .
Fear not , daughter of Sion : behold , thy King cometh , sitting on an ass ' s colt .
These things understood not his disciples at the first : but when Jesus was glorified , then remembered they that these things were written of him , and that they had done these things unto him .
The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave , and raised him from the dead , bare record .
For this cause the people also met him , for that they heard that he had done this miracle .
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves , Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing ? behold , the world is gone after him .
And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the feast .
The same came therefore to Philip , which was of Bethsaida of Galilee , and desired him , saying , Sir , we would see Jesus .
Philip cometh and telleth Andrew : and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus .
And Jesus answered them , saying , The hour is come , that the Son of man should be glorified .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone : but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit .
He that loveth his life shall lose it ; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal .
If any man serve me , let him follow me ; and where I am , there shall also my servant be : if any man serve me , him will my Father honour .
Now is my soul troubled ; and what shall I say ? Father , save me from this hour : but for this cause came I unto this hour .
Father , glorify thy name . Then came there a voice from heaven , saying , I have both glorified it , and will glorify it again .
The people therefore , that stood by , and heard it , said that it thundered : others said , An angel spake to him .
Jesus answered and said , This voice came not because of me , but for your sakes .
Now is the judgment of this world : now shall the prince of this world be cast out .
And I , if I be lifted up from the earth , will draw all men unto me .
This he said , signifying what death he should die .
The people answered him , We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever : and how sayest thou , The Son of man must be lifted up ? who is this Son of man ?
Then Jesus said unto them , Yet a little while is the light with you . Walk while ye have the light , lest darkness come upon you : for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth .
While ye have light , believe in the light , that ye may be the children of light . These things spake Jesus , and departed , and did hide himself from them .
But though he had done so many miracles before them , yet they believed not on him .
That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled , which he spake , Lord , who hath believed our report ? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed ?
Therefore they could not believe , because that Esaias said again .
He hath blinded their eyes , and hardened their heart ; that they should not see with their eyes , nor understand with their heart , and be converted , and I should heal them .
These things said Esaias , when he saw his glory , and spake of him .
Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him ; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him , lest they should be put out of the synagogue .
For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God .
Jesus cried and said , He that believeth on me , believeth not on me , but on him that sent me .
And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me .
I am come a light into the world , that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness .
And if any man hear my words , and believe not , I judge him not : for I came not to judge the world , but to save the world .
He that rejecteth me , and receiveth not my words , hath one that judgeth him : the word that I have spoken , the same shall judge him in the last day .
For I have not spoken of myself ; but the Father which sent me , he gave me a commandment , what I should say , and what I should speak .
And I know that his commandment is life everlasting : whatsoever I speak therefore , even as the Father said unto me , so I speak .
Now before the feast of the passover , when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father , having loved his own which were in the world , he loved them unto the end .
And supper being ended , the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot , Simon ' s son , to betray him .
Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands , and that he was come from God , and went to God .
He riseth from supper , and laid aside his garments ; and took a towel , and girded himself .
After that he poureth water into a bason , and began to wash the disciples ' feet , and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded .
Then cometh he to Simon Peter : and Peter saith unto him , Lord , dost thou wash my feet ?
Jesus answered and said unto him , What I do thou knowest not now ; but thou shalt know hereafter .
Peter saith unto him , Thou shalt never wash my feet . Jesus answered him , If I wash thee not , thou hast no part with me .
Simon Peter saith unto him , Lord , not my feet only , but also my hands and my head .
Jesus saith to him , He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet , but is clean every whit : and ye are clean , but not all .
For he knew who should betray him ; therefore said he , Ye are not all clean .
So after he had washed their feet , and had taken his garments , and was set down again , he said unto them , Know ye what I have done to you ?
Ye call me Master and Lord : and ye say well ; for so I am .
If I then , your Lord and Master , have washed your feet ; ye also ought to wash one another ' s feet .
For I have given you an example , that ye should do as I have done to you .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , The servant is not greater than his lord ; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him .
If ye know these things , happy are ye if ye do them .
I speak not of you all : I know whom I have chosen : but that the scripture may be fulfilled , He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me .
Now I tell you before it come , that , when it is come to pass , ye may believe that I am he .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me ; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me .
When Jesus had thus said , he was troubled in spirit , and testified , and said , Verily , verily , I say unto you , that one of you shall betray me .
Then the disciples looked one on another , doubting of whom he spake .
Now there was leaning on Jesus ' bosom one of his disciples , whom Jesus loved .
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him , that he should ask who it should be of whom he spake .
He then lying on Jesus ' breast saith unto him , Lord , who is it ?
Jesus answered , He it is , to whom I shall give a sop , when I have dipped it . And when he had dipped the sop , he gave it to Judas Iscariot , the son of Simon .
And after the sop Satan entered into him . Then said Jesus unto him , That thou doest , do quickly .
Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him .
For some of them thought , because Judas had the bag , that Jesus had said unto him , Buy those things that we have need of against the feast ; or , that he should give something to the poor .
He then having received the sop went immediately out : and it was night .
Therefore , when he was gone out , Jesus said , Now is the Son of man glorified , and God is glorified in him .
If God be glorified in him , God shall also glorify him in himself , and shall straightway glorify him .
Little children , yet a little while I am with you . Ye shall seek me : and as I said unto the Jews , Whither I go , ye cannot come ; so now I say to you .
A new commandment I give unto you , That ye love one another ; as I have loved you , that ye also love one another .
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples , if ye have love one to another .
Simon Peter said unto him , Lord , whither goest thou ? Jesus answered him , Whither I go , thou canst not follow me now ; but thou shalt follow me afterwards .
Peter said unto him , Lord , why cannot I follow thee now ? I will lay down my life for thy sake .
Jesus answered him , Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake ? Verily , verily , I say unto thee , The cock shall not crow , till thou hast denied me thrice .
Let not your heart be troubled : ye believe in God , believe also in me .
In my Father ' s house are many mansions : if it were not so , I would have told you . I go to prepare a place for you .
And if I go and prepare a place for you , I will come again , and receive you unto myself ; that where I am , there ye may be also .
And whither I go ye know , and the way ye know .
Thomas saith unto him , Lord , we know not whither thou goest ; and how can we know the way ?
Jesus saith unto him , I am the way , the truth , and the life : no man cometh unto the Father , but by me .
If ye had known me , ye should have known my Father also : and from henceforth ye know him , and have seen him .
Philip saith unto him , Lord , shew us the Father , and it sufficeth us .
Jesus saith unto him , Have I been so long time with you , and yet hast thou not known me , Philip ? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father ; and how sayest thou then , Shew us the Father ?
Believest thou not that I am in the Father , and the Father in me ? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself : but the Father that dwelleth in me , he doeth the works .
Believe me that I am in the Father , and the Father in me : or else believe me for the very works ' sake .
Verily , verily , I say unto you , He that believeth on me , the works that I do shall he do also ; and greater works than these shall he do ; because I go unto my Father .
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name , that will I do , that the Father may be glorified in the Son .
If ye shall ask any thing in my name , I will do it .
If ye love me , keep my commandments .
And I will pray the Father , and he shall give you another Comforter , that he may abide with you for ever .
Even the Spirit of truth ; whom the world cannot receive , because it seeth him not , neither knoweth him : but ye know him ; for he dwelleth with you , and shall be in you .
I will not leave you comfortless : I will come to you .
Yet a little while , and the world seeth me no more ; but ye see me : because I live , ye shall live also .
At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father , and ye in me , and I in you .
He that hath my commandments , and keepeth them , he it is that loveth me : and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father , and I will love him , and will manifest myself to him .
Judas saith unto him , not Iscariot , Lord , how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us , and not unto the world ?
Jesus answered and said unto him , If a man love me , he will keep my words : and my Father will love him , and we will come unto him , and make our abode with him .
He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings : and the word which ye hear is not mine , but the Father ' s which sent me .
These things have I spoken unto you , being yet present with you .
But the Comforter , which is the Holy Ghost , whom the Father will send in my name , he shall teach you all things , and bring all things to your remembrance , whatsoever I have said unto you .
Peace I leave with you , my peace I give unto you : not as the world giveth , give I unto you . Let not your heart be troubled , neither let it be afraid .
Ye have heard how I said unto you , I go away , and come again unto you . If ye loved me , ye would rejoice , because I said , I go unto the Father : for my Father is greater than I .
And now I have told you before it come to pass , that , when it is come to pass , ye might believe .
Hereafter I will not talk much with you : for the prince of this world cometh , and hath nothing in me .
But that the world may know that I love the Father ; and as the Father gave me commandment , even so I do . Arise , let us go hence .
I am the true vine , and my Father is the husbandman .
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away : and every branch that beareth fruit , he purgeth it , that it may bring forth more fruit .
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you .
Abide in me , and I in you . As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself , except it abide in the vine ; no more can ye , except ye abide in me .
I am the vine , ye are the branches : He that abideth in me , and I in him , the same bringeth forth much fruit : for without me ye can do nothing .
If a man abide not in me , he is cast forth as a branch , and is withered ; and men gather them , and cast them into the fire , and they are burned .
If ye abide in me , and my words abide in you , ye shall ask what ye will , and it shall be done unto you .
Herein is my Father glorified , that ye bear much fruit ; so shall ye be my disciples .
As the Father hath loved me , so have I loved you : continue ye in my love .
If ye keep my commandments , ye shall abide in my love ; even as I have kept my Father ' s commandments , and abide in his love .
These things have I spoken unto you , that my joy might remain in you , and that your joy might be full .
This is my commandment , That ye love one another , as I have loved you .
Greater love hath no man than this , that a man lay down his life for his friends .
Ye are my friends , if ye do whatsoever I command you .
Henceforth I call you not servants ; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth : but I have called you friends ; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you .
Ye have not chosen me , but I have chosen you , and ordained you , that ye should go and bring forth fruit , and that your fruit should remain : that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name , he may give it you .
These things I command you , that ye love one another .
If the world hate you , ye know that it hated me before it hated you .
If ye were of the world , the world would love his own : but because ye are not of the world , but I have chosen you out of the world , therefore the world hateth you .
Remember the word that I said unto you , The servant is not greater than his lord . If they have persecuted me , they will also persecute you ; if they have kept my saying , they will keep yours also .
But all these things will they do unto you for my name ' s sake , because they know not him that sent me .
If I had not come and spoken unto them , they had not had sin : but now they have no cloke for their sin .
He that hateth me hateth my Father also .
If I had not done among them the works which none other man did , they had not had sin : but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father .
But this cometh to pass , that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law , They hated me without a cause .
But when the Comforter is come , whom I will send unto you from the Father , even the Spirit of truth , which proceedeth from the Father , he shall testify of me .
And ye also shall bear witness , because ye have been with me from the beginning .
These things have I spoken unto you , that ye should not be offended .
They shall put you out of the synagogues : yea , the time cometh , that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service .
And these things will they do unto you , because they have not known the Father , nor me .
But these things have I told you , that when the time shall come , ye may remember that I told you of them . And these things I said not unto you at the beginning , because I was with you .
But now I go my way to him that sent me ; and none of you asketh me , Whither goest thou ?
But because I have said these things unto you , sorrow hath filled your heart .
Nevertheless I tell you the truth ; It is expedient for you that I go away : for if I go not away , the Comforter will not come unto you ; but if I depart , I will send him unto you .
And when he is come , he will reprove the world of sin , and of righteousness , and of judgment .
Of sin , because they believe not on me .
Of righteousness , because I go to my Father , and ye see me no more .
Of judgment , because the prince of this world is judged .
I have yet many things to say unto you , but ye cannot bear them now .
Howbeit when he , the Spirit of truth , is come , he will guide you into all truth : for he shall not speak of himself ; but whatsoever he shall hear , that shall he speak : and he will shew you things to come .
He shall glorify me : for he shall receive of mine , and shall shew it unto you .
All things that the Father hath are mine : therefore said I , that he shall take of mine , and shall shew it unto you .
A little while , and ye shall not see me : and again , a little while , and ye shall see me , because I go to the Father .
Then said some of his disciples among themselves , What is this that he saith unto us , A little while , and ye shall not see me : and again , a little while , and ye shall see me : and , Because I go to the Father ?
They said therefore , What is this that he saith , A little while ? we cannot tell what he saith .
Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him , and said unto them , Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said , A little while , and ye shall not see me : and again , a little while , and ye shall see me ?
Verily , verily , I say unto you , That ye shall weep and lament , but the world shall rejoice : and ye shall be sorrowful , but your sorrow shall be turned into joy .
A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow , because her hour is come : but as soon as she is delivered of the child , she remembereth no more the anguish , for joy that a man is born into the world .
And ye now therefore have sorrow : but I will see you again , and your heart shall rejoice , and your joy no man taketh from you .
And in that day ye shall ask me nothing . Verily , verily , I say unto you , Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name , he will give it you .
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name : ask , and ye shall receive , that your joy may be full .
These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs : but the time cometh , when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs , but I shall shew you plainly of the Father .
At that day ye shall ask in my name : and I say not unto you , that I will pray the Father for you .
For the Father himself loveth you , because ye have loved me , and have believed that I came out from God .
I came forth from the Father , and am come into the world : again , I leave the world , and go to the Father .
His disciples said unto him , Lo , now speakest thou plainly , and speakest no proverb .
Now are we sure that thou knowest all things , and needest not that any man should ask thee : by this we believe that thou camest forth from God .
Jesus answered them , Do ye now believe ?
Behold , the hour cometh , yea , is now come , that ye shall be scattered , every man to his own , and shall leave me alone : and yet I am not alone , because the Father is with me .
These things I have spoken unto you , that in me ye might have peace . In the world ye shall have tribulation : but be of good cheer ; I have overcome the world .
These words spake Jesus , and lifted up his eyes to heaven , and said , Father , the hour is come ; glorify thy Son , that thy Son also may glorify thee .
As thou hast given him power over all flesh , that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him .
And this is life eternal , that they might know thee the only true God , and Jesus Christ , whom thou hast sent .
I have glorified thee on the earth : I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do .
And now , O Father , glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was .
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world : thine they were , and thou gavest them me ; and they have kept thy word .
Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee .
For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me ; and they have received them , and have known surely that I came out from thee , and they have believed that thou didst send me .
I pray for them : I pray not for the world , but for them which thou hast given me ; for they are thine .
And all mine are thine , and thine are mine ; and I am glorified in them .
And now I am no more in the world , but these are in the world , and I come to thee . Holy Father , keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me , that they may be one , as we are .
While I was with them in the world , I kept them in thy name : those that thou gavest me I have kept , and none of them is lost , but the son of perdition ; that the scripture might be fulfilled .
And now come I to thee ; and these things I speak in the world , that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves .
I have given them thy word ; and the world hath hated them , because they are not of the world , even as I am not of the world .
I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world , but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil .
They are not of the world , even as I am not of the world .
Sanctify them through thy truth : thy word is truth .
As thou hast sent me into the world , even so have I also sent them into the world .
And for their sakes I sanctify myself , that they also might be sanctified through the truth .
Neither pray I for these alone , but for them also which shall believe on me through their word .
That they all may be one ; as thou , Father , art in me , and I in thee , that they also may be one in us : that the world may believe that thou hast sent me .
And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them ; that they may be one , even as we are one .
I in them , and thou in me , that they may be made perfect in one ; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me , and hast loved them , as thou hast loved me .
Father , I will that they also , whom thou hast given me , be with me where I am ; that they may behold my glory , which thou hast given me : for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world .
O righteous Father , the world hath not known thee : but I have known thee , and these have known that thou hast sent me .
And I have declared unto them thy name , and will declare it : that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them , and I in them .
When Jesus had spoken these words , he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron , where was a garden , into the which he entered , and his disciples .
And Judas also , which betrayed him , knew the place : for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples .
Judas then , having received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees , cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons .
Jesus therefore , knowing all things that should come upon him , went forth , and said unto them , Whom seek ye ?
They answered him , Jesus of Nazareth . Jesus saith unto them , I am he . And Judas also , which betrayed him , stood with them .
As soon then as he had said unto them , I am he , they went backward , and fell to the ground .
Then asked he them again , Whom seek ye ? And they said , Jesus of Nazareth .
Jesus answered , I have told you that I am he : if therefore ye seek me , let these go their way .
That the saying might be fulfilled , which he spake , Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none .
Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it , and smote the high priest ' s servant , and cut off his right ear . The servant ' s name was Malchus .
Then said Jesus unto Peter , Put up thy sword into the sheath : the cup which my Father hath given me , shall I not drink it ?
Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus , and bound him .
And led him away to Annas first ; for he was father in law to Caiaphas , which was the high priest that same year .
Now Caiaphas was he , which gave counsel to the Jews , that it was expedient that one man should die for the people .
And Simon Peter followed Jesus , and so did another disciple : that disciple was known unto the high priest , and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest .
But Peter stood at the door without . Then went out that other disciple , which was known unto the high priest , and spake unto her that kept the door , and brought in Peter .
Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter , Art not thou also one of this man ' s disciples ? He saith , I am not .
And the servants and officers stood there , who had made a fire of coals ; for it was cold : and they warmed themselves : and Peter stood with them , and warmed himself .
The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples , and of his doctrine .
Jesus answered him , I spake openly to the world ; I ever taught in the synagogue , and in the temple , whither the Jews always resort ; and in secret have I said nothing .
Why askest thou me ? ask them which heard me , what I have said unto them : behold , they know what I said .
And when he had thus spoken , one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand , saying , Answerest thou the high priest so ?
Jesus answered him , If I have spoken evil , bear witness of the evil : but if well , why smitest thou me ?
Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest .
And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself . They said therefore unto him , Art not thou also one of his disciples ? He denied it , and said , I am not .
One of the servants of the high priest , being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off , saith , Did not I see thee in the garden with him ?
Peter then denied again : and immediately the cock crew .
Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment : and it was early ; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall , lest they should be defiled ; but that they might eat the passover .
Pilate then went out unto them , and said , What accusation bring ye against this man ?
They answered and said unto him , If he were not a malefactor , we would not have delivered him up unto thee .
Then said Pilate unto them , Take ye him , and judge him according to your law . The Jews therefore said unto him , It is not lawful for us to put any man to death .
That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled , which he spake , signifying what death he should die .
Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again , and called Jesus , and said unto him , Art thou the King of the Jews ?
Jesus answered him , Sayest thou this thing of thyself , or did others tell it thee of me ?
Pilate answered , Am I a Jew ? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me : what hast thou done ?
Jesus answered , My kingdom is not of this world : if my kingdom were of this world , then would my servants fight , that I should not be delivered to the Jews : but now is my kingdom not from hence .
Pilate therefore said unto him , Art thou a king then ? Jesus answered , Thou sayest that I am a king . To this end was I born , and for this cause came I into the world , that I should bear witness unto the truth . Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice .
Pilate saith unto him , What is truth ? And when he had said this , he went out again unto the Jews , and saith unto them , I find in him no fault at all .
But ye have a custom , that I should release unto you one at the passover : will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews ?
Then cried they all again , saying , Not this man , but Barabbas . Now Barabbas was a robber .
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus , and scourged him .
And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns , and put it on his head , and they put on him a purple robe .
And said , Hail , King of the Jews ! and they smote him with their hands .
Pilate therefore went forth again , and saith unto them , Behold , I bring him forth to you , that ye may know that I find no fault in him .
Then came Jesus forth , wearing the crown of thorns , and the purple robe . And Pilate saith unto them , Behold the man !
When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him , they cried out , saying , Crucify him , crucify him . Pilate saith unto them , Take ye him , and crucify him : for I find no fault in him .
The Jews answered him , We have a law , and by our law he ought to die , because he made himself the Son of God .
When Pilate therefore heard that saying , he was the more afraid .
And went again into the judgment hall , and saith unto Jesus , Whence art thou ? But Jesus gave him no answer .
Then saith Pilate unto him , Speakest thou not unto me ? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee , and have power to release thee ?
Jesus answered , Thou couldest have no power at all against me , except it were given thee from above : therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin .
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him : but the Jews cried out , saying , If thou let this man go , thou art not Caesar ' s friend : whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar .
When Pilate therefore heard that saying , he brought Jesus forth , and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement , but in the Hebrew , Gabbatha .
And it was the preparation of the passover , and about the sixth hour : and he saith unto the Jews , Behold your King !
But they cried out , Away with him , away with him , crucify him . Pilate saith unto them , Shall I crucify your King ? The chief priests answered , We have no king but Caesar .
Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified . And they took Jesus , and led him away .
And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place of a skull , which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha .
Where they crucified him , and two other with him , on either side one , and Jesus in the midst .
And Pilate wrote a title , and put it on the cross . And the writing was , JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS .
This title then read many of the Jews : for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city : and it was written in Hebrew , and Greek , and Latin .
Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate , Write not , The King of the Jews ; but that he said , I am King of the Jews .
Pilate answered , What I have written I have written .
Then the soldiers , when they had crucified Jesus , took his garments , and made four parts , to every soldier a part ; and also his coat : now the coat was without seam , woven from the top throughout .
They said therefore among themselves , Let us not rend it , but cast lots for it , whose it shall be : that the scripture might be fulfilled , which saith , They parted my raiment among them , and for my vesture they did cast lots . These things therefore the soldiers did .
Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother , and his mother ' s sister , Mary the wife of Cleophas , and Mary Magdalene .
When Jesus therefore saw his mother , and the disciple standing by , whom he loved , he saith unto his mother , Woman , behold thy son !
Then saith he to the disciple , Behold thy mother ! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home .
After this , Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished , that the scripture might be fulfilled , saith , I thirst .
Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar : and they filled a spunge with vinegar , and put it upon hyssop , and put it to his mouth .
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar , he said , It is finished : and he bowed his head , and gave up the ghost .
The Jews therefore , because it was the preparation , that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day , ( for that sabbath day was an high day , ) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken , and that they might be taken away .
Then came the soldiers , and brake the legs of the first , and of the other which was crucified with him .
But when they came to Jesus , and saw that he was dead already , they brake not his legs .
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side , and forthwith came there out blood and water .
And he that saw it bare record , and his record is true : and he knoweth that he saith true , that ye might believe .
For these things were done , that the scripture should be fulfilled , A bone of him shall not be broken .
And again another scripture saith , They shall look on him whom they pierced .
And after this Joseph of Arimathaea , being a disciple of Jesus , but secretly for fear of the Jews , besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus : and Pilate gave him leave . He came therefore , and took the body of Jesus .
And there came also Nicodemus , which at the first came to Jesus by night , and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes , about an hundred pound weight .
Then took they the body of Jesus , and wound it in linen clothes with the spices , as the manner of the Jews is to bury .
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden ; and in the garden a new sepulchre , wherein was never man yet laid .
There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews ' preparation day ; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand .
The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early , when it was yet dark , unto the sepulchre , and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre .
Then she runneth , and cometh to Simon Peter , and to the other disciple , whom Jesus loved , and saith unto them , They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre , and we know not where they have laid him .
Peter therefore went forth , and that other disciple , and came to the sepulchre .
So they ran both together : and the other disciple did outrun Peter , and came first to the sepulchre .
And he stooping down , and looking in , saw the linen clothes lying ; yet went he not in .
Then cometh Simon Peter following him , and went into the sepulchre , and seeth the linen clothes lie .
And the napkin , that was about his head , not lying with the linen clothes , but wrapped together in a place by itself .
Then went in also that other disciple , which came first to the sepulchre , and he saw , and believed .
For as yet they knew not the scripture , that he must rise again from the dead .
Then the disciples went away again unto their own home .
But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping : and as she wept , she stooped down , and looked into the sepulchre .
And seeth two angels in white sitting , the one at the head , and the other at the feet , where the body of Jesus had lain .
And they say unto her , Woman , why weepest thou ? She saith unto them , Because they have taken away my Lord , and I know not where they have laid him .
And when she had thus said , she turned herself back , and saw Jesus standing , and knew not that it was Jesus .
Jesus saith unto her , Woman , why weepest thou ? whom seekest thou ? She , supposing him to be the gardener , saith unto him , Sir , if thou have borne him hence , tell me where thou hast laid him , and I will take him away .
Jesus saith unto her , Mary . She turned herself , and saith unto him , Rabboni ; which is to say , Master .
Jesus saith unto her , Touch me not ; for I am not yet ascended to my Father : but go to my brethren , and say unto them , I ascend unto my Father , and your Father ; and to my God , and your God .
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord , and that he had spoken these things unto her .
Then the same day at evening , being the first day of the week , when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews , came Jesus and stood in the midst , and saith unto them , Peace be unto you .
And when he had so said , he shewed unto them his hands and his side . Then were the disciples glad , when they saw the Lord .
Then said Jesus to them again , Peace be unto you : as my Father hath sent me , even so send I you .
And when he had said this , he breathed on them , and saith unto them , Receive ye the Holy Ghost .
Whose soever sins ye remit , they are remitted unto them ; and whose soever sins ye retain , they are retained .
But Thomas , one of the twelve , called Didymus , was not with them when Jesus came .
The other disciples therefore said unto him , We have seen the Lord . But he said unto them , Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails , and put my finger into the print of the nails , and thrust my hand into his side , I will not believe .
And after eight days again his disciples were within , and Thomas with them : then came Jesus , the doors being shut , and stood in the midst , and said , Peace be unto you .
Then saith he to Thomas , Reach hither thy finger , and behold my hands ; and reach hither thy hand , and thrust it into my side : and be not faithless , but believing .
And Thomas answered and said unto him , My Lord and my God .
Jesus saith unto him , Thomas , because thou hast seen me , thou hast believed : blessed are they that have not seen , and yet have believed .
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples , which are not written in this book .
But these are written , that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ , the Son of God ; and that believing ye might have life through his name .
After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias ; and on this wise shewed he himself .
There were together Simon Peter , and Thomas called Didymus , and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee , and the sons of Zebedee , and two other of his disciples .
Simon Peter saith unto them , I go a fishing . They say unto him , We also go with thee . They went forth , and entered into a ship immediately ; and that night they caught nothing .
But when the morning was now come , Jesus stood on the shore : but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus .
Then Jesus saith unto them , Children , have ye any meat ? They answered him , No .
And he said unto them , Cast the net on the right side of the ship , and ye shall find . They cast therefore , and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes .
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter , It is the Lord . Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord , he girt his fisher ' s coat unto him , ( for he was naked , ) and did cast himself into the sea .
And the other disciples came in a little ship ; ( for they were not far from land , but as it were two hundred cubits , ) dragging the net with fishes .
As soon then as they were come to land , they saw a fire of coals there , and fish laid thereon , and bread .
Jesus saith unto them , Bring of the fish which ye have now caught .
Simon Peter went up , and drew the net to land full of great fishes , an hundred and fifty and three : and for all there were so many , yet was not the net broken .
Jesus saith unto them , Come and dine . And none of the disciples durst ask him , Who art thou ? knowing that it was the Lord .
Jesus then cometh , and taketh bread , and giveth them , and fish likewise .
This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples , after that he was risen from the dead .
So when they had dined , Jesus saith to Simon Peter , Simon , son of Jonas , lovest thou me more than these ? He saith unto him , Yea , Lord ; thou knowest that I love thee . He saith unto him , Feed my lambs .
He saith to him again the second time , Simon , son of Jonas , lovest thou me ? He saith unto him , Yea , Lord ; thou knowest that I love thee . He saith unto him , Feed my sheep .
He saith unto him the third time , Simon , son of Jonas , lovest thou me ? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time , Lovest thou me ? And he said unto him , Lord , thou knowest all things ; thou knowest that I love thee . Jesus saith unto him , Feed my sheep .
Verily , verily , I say unto thee , When thou wast young , thou girdedst thyself , and walkedst whither thou wouldest : but when thou shalt be old , thou shalt stretch forth thy hands , and another shall gird thee , and carry thee whither thou wouldest not .
This spake he , signifying by what death he should glorify God . And when he had spoken this , he saith unto him , Follow me .
Then Peter , turning about , seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following ; which also leaned on his breast at supper , and said , Lord , which is he that betrayeth thee ?
Peter seeing him saith to Jesus , Lord , and what shall this man do ?
Jesus saith unto him , If I will that he tarry till I come , what is that to thee ? follow thou me .
Then went this saying abroad among the brethren , that that disciple should not die : yet Jesus said not unto him , He shall not die ; but , If I will that he tarry till I come , what is that to thee ?
This is the disciple which testifieth of these things , and wrote these things : and we know that his testimony is true .
And there are also many other things which Jesus did , the which , if they should be written every one , I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written . Amen .
The former treatise have I made , O Theophilus , of all that Jesus began both to do and teach .
Until the day in which he was taken up , after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen .
To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs , being seen of them forty days , and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God .
And , being assembled together with them , commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem , but wait for the promise of the Father , which , saith he , ye have heard of me .
For John truly baptized with water ; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence .
When they therefore were come together , they asked of him , saying , Lord , wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel ?
And he said unto them , It is not for you to know the times or the seasons , which the Father hath put in his own power .
But ye shall receive power , after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you : and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem , and in all Judaea , and in Samaria , and unto the uttermost part of the earth .
And when he had spoken these things , while they beheld , he was taken up ; and a cloud received him out of their sight .
And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up , behold , two men stood by them in white apparel .
Which also said , Ye men of Galilee , why stand ye gazing up into heaven ? this same Jesus , which is taken up from you into heaven , shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven .
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet , which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day ' s journey .
And when they were come in , they went up into an upper room , where abode both Peter , and James , and John , and Andrew , Philip , and Thomas , Bartholomew , and Matthew , James the son of Alphaeus , and Simon Zelotes , and Judas the brother of James .
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication , with the women , and Mary the mother of Jesus , and with his brethren .
And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples , and said , ( the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty , )
Men and brethren , this scripture must needs have been fulfilled , which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas , which was guide to them that took Jesus .
For he was numbered with us , and had obtained part of this ministry .
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity ; and falling headlong , he burst asunder in the midst , and all his bowels gushed out .
And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem ; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue , Aceldama , that is to say , The field of blood .
For it is written in the book of Psalms , Let his habitation be desolate , and let no man dwell therein : and his bishoprick let another take .
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us .
Beginning from the baptism of John , unto that same day that he was taken up from us , must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection .
And they appointed two , Joseph called Barsabas , who was surnamed Justus , and Matthias .
And they prayed , and said , Thou , Lord , which knowest the hearts of all men , shew whether of these two thou hast chosen .
That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship , from which Judas by transgression fell , that he might go to his own place .
And they gave forth their lots ; and the lot fell upon Matthias ; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles .
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come , they were all with one accord in one place .
And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind , and it filled all the house where they were sitting .
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire , and it sat upon each of them .
And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost , and began to speak with other tongues , as the Spirit gave them utterance .
And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews , devout men , out of every nation under heaven .
Now when this was noised abroad , the multitude came together , and were confounded , because that every man heard them speak in his own language .
And they were all amazed and marvelled , saying one to another , Behold , are not all these which speak Galilaeans ?
And how hear we every man in our own tongue , wherein we were born ?
Parthians , and Medes , and Elamites , and the dwellers in Mesopotamia , and in Judaea , and Cappadocia , in Pontus , and Asia .
Phrygia , and Pamphylia , in Egypt , and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene , and strangers of Rome , Jews and proselytes .
Cretes and Arabians , we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God .
And they were all amazed , and were in doubt , saying one to another , What meaneth this ?
Others mocking said , These men are full of new wine .
But Peter , standing up with the eleven , lifted up his voice , and said unto them , Ye men of Judaea , and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem , be this known unto you , and hearken to my words .
For these are not drunken , as ye suppose , seeing it is but the third hour of the day .
But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel .
And it shall come to pass in the last days , saith God , I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh : and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy , and your young men shall see visions , and your old men shall dream dreams .
And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit ; and they shall prophesy .
And I will shew wonders in heaven above , and signs in the earth beneath ; blood , and fire , and vapour of smoke .
The sun shall be turned into darkness , and the moon into blood , before that great and notable day of the Lord come .
And it shall come to pass , that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved .
Ye men of Israel , hear these words ; Jesus of Nazareth , a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs , which God did by him in the midst of you , as ye yourselves also know .
Him , being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God , ye have taken , and by wicked hands have crucified and slain .
Whom God hath raised up , having loosed the pains of death : because it was not possible that he should be holden of it .
For David speaketh concerning him , I foresaw the Lord always before my face , for he is on my right hand , that I should not be moved .
Therefore did my heart rejoice , and my tongue was glad ; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope .
Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell , neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption .
Thou hast made known to me the ways of life ; thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance .
Men and brethren , let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David , that he is both dead and buried , and his sepulchre is with us unto this day .
Therefore being a prophet , and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him , that of the fruit of his loins , according to the flesh , he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne .
He seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ , that his soul was not left in hell , neither his flesh did see corruption .
This Jesus hath God raised up , whereof we all are witnesses .
Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted , and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost , he hath shed forth this , which ye now see and hear .
For David is not ascended into the heavens : but he saith himself , The LORD said unto my Lord , Sit thou on my right hand .
Until I make thy foes thy footstool .
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly , that God hath made that same Jesus , whom ye have crucified , both Lord and Christ .
Now when they heard this , they were pricked in their heart , and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles , Men and brethren , what shall we do ?
Then Peter said unto them , Repent , and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins , and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost .
For the promise is unto you , and to your children , and to all that are afar off , even as many as the Lord our God shall call .
And with many other words did he testify and exhort , saying , Save yourselves from this untoward generation .
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized : and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls .
And they continued stedfastly in the apostles ' doctrine and fellowship , and in breaking of bread , and in prayers .
And fear came upon every soul : and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles .
And all that believed were together , and had all things common .
And sold their possessions and goods , and parted them to all men , as every man had need .
And they , continuing daily with one accord in the temple , and breaking bread from house to house , did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart .
Praising God , and having favour with all the people . And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved .
Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer , being the ninth hour .
And a certain man lame from his mother ' s womb was carried , whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful , to ask alms of them that entered into the temple .
Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms .
And Peter , fastening his eyes upon him with John , said , Look on us .
And he gave heed unto them , expecting to receive something of them .
Then Peter said , Silver and gold have I none ; but such as I have give I thee : In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk .
And he took him by the right hand , and lifted him up : and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength .
And he leaping up stood , and walked , and entered with them into the temple , walking , and leaping , and praising God .
And all the people saw him walking and praising God .
And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple : and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him .
And as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John , all the people ran together unto them in the porch that is called Solomon ' s , greatly wondering .
And when Peter saw it , he answered unto the people , Ye men of Israel , why marvel ye at this ? or why look ye so earnestly on us , as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk ?
The God of Abraham , and of Isaac , and of Jacob , the God of our fathers , hath glorified his Son Jesus ; whom ye delivered up , and denied him in the presence of Pilate , when he was determined to let him go .
But ye denied the Holy One and the Just , and desired a murderer to be granted unto you .
And killed the Prince of life , whom God hath raised from the dead ; whereof we are witnesses .
And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong , whom ye see and know : yea , the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all .
And now , brethren , I wot that through ignorance ye did it , as did also your rulers .
But those things , which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets , that Christ should suffer , he hath so fulfilled .
Repent ye therefore , and be converted , that your sins may be blotted out , when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord .
And he shall send Jesus Christ , which before was preached unto you .
Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things , which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began .
For Moses truly said unto the fathers , A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren , like unto me ; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you .
And it shall come to pass , that every soul , which will not hear that prophet , shall be destroyed from among the people .
Yea , and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after , as many as have spoken , have likewise foretold of these days .
Ye are the children of the prophets , and of the covenant which God made with our fathers , saying unto Abraham , And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed .
Unto you first God , having raised up his Son Jesus , sent him to bless you , in turning away every one of you from his iniquities .
And as they spake unto the people , the priests , and the captain of the temple , and the Sadducees , came upon them .
Being grieved that they taught the people , and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead .
And they laid hands on them , and put them in hold unto the next day : for it was now eventide .
Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed ; and the number of the men was about five thousand .
And it came to pass on the morrow , that their rulers , and elders , and scribes .
And Annas the high priest , and Caiaphas , and John , and Alexander , and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest , were gathered together at Jerusalem .
And when they had set them in the midst , they asked , By what power , or by what name , have ye done this ?
Then Peter , filled with the Holy Ghost , said unto them , Ye rulers of the people , and elders of Israel .
If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man , by what means he is made whole .
Be it known unto you all , and to all the people of Israel , that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth , whom ye crucified , whom God raised from the dead , even by him doth this man stand here before you whole .
This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders , which is become the head of the corner .
Neither is there salvation in any other : for there is none other name under heaven given among men , whereby we must be saved .
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John , and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men , they marvelled ; and they took knowledge of them , that they had been with Jesus .
And beholding the man which was healed standing with them , they could say nothing against it .
But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council , they conferred among themselves .
Saying , What shall we do to these men ? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem ; and we cannot deny it .
But that it spread no further among the people , let us straitly threaten them , that they speak henceforth to no man in this name .
And they called them , and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus .
But Peter and John answered and said unto them , Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God , judge ye .
For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard .
So when they had further threatened them , they let them go , finding nothing how they might punish them , because of the people : for all men glorified God for that which was done .
For the man was above forty years old , on whom this miracle of healing was shewed .
And being let go , they went to their own company , and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them .
And when they heard that , they lifted up their voice to God with one accord , and said , Lord , thou art God , which hast made heaven , and earth , and the sea , and all that in them is .
Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said , Why did the heathen rage , and the people imagine vain things ?
The kings of the earth stood up , and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord , and against his Christ .
For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus , whom thou hast anointed , both Herod , and Pontius Pilate , with the Gentiles , and the people of Israel , were gathered together .
For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done .
And now , Lord , behold their threatenings : and grant unto thy servants , that with all boldness they may speak thy word .
By stretching forth thine hand to heal ; and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus .
And when they had prayed , the place was shaken where they were assembled together ; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost , and they spake the word of God with boldness .
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul : neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own ; but they had all things common .
And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus : and great grace was upon them all .
Neither was there any among them that lacked : for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them , and brought the prices of the things that were sold .
And laid them down at the apostles ' feet : and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need .
And Joses , who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas , ( which is , being interpreted , The son of consolation , ) a Levite , and of the country of Cyprus .
Having land , sold it , and brought the money , and laid it at the apostles ' feet .
But a certain man named Ananias , with Sapphira his wife , sold a possession .
And kept back part of the price , his wife also being privy to it , and brought a certain part , and laid it at the apostles ' feet .
But Peter said , Ananias , why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost , and to keep back part of the price of the land ?
Whiles it remained , was it not thine own ? and after it was sold , was it not in thine own power ? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart ? thou hast not lied unto men , but unto God .
And Ananias hearing these words fell down , and gave up the ghost : and great fear came on all them that heard these things .
And the young men arose , wound him up , and carried him out , and buried him .
And it was about the space of three hours after , when his wife , not knowing what was done , came in .
And Peter answered unto her , Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much ? And she said , Yea , for so much .
Then Peter said unto her , How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord ? behold , the feet of them which have buried thy husband are at the door , and shall carry thee out .
Then fell she down straightway at his feet , and yielded up the ghost : and the young men came in , and found her dead , and , carrying her forth , buried her by her husband .
And great fear came upon all the church , and upon as many as heard these things .
And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people ; ( and they were all with one accord in Solomon ' s porch .
And of the rest durst no man join himself to them : but the people magnified them .
And believers were the more added to the Lord , multitudes both of men and women . )
Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets , and laid them on beds and couches , that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them .
There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem , bringing sick folks , and them which were vexed with unclean spirits : and they were healed every one .
Then the high priest rose up , and all they that were with him , ( which is the sect of the Sadducees , ) and were filled with indignation .
And laid their hands on the apostles , and put them in the common prison .
But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors , and brought them forth , and said .
Go , stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life .
And when they heard that , they entered into the temple early in the morning , and taught . But the high priest came , and they that were with him , and called the council together , and all the senate of the children of Israel , and sent to the prison to have them brought .
But when the officers came , and found them not in the prison , they returned , and told .
Saying , The prison truly found we shut with all safety , and the keepers standing without before the doors : but when we had opened , we found no man within .
Now when the high priest and the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these things , they doubted of them whereunto this would grow .
Then came one and told them , saying , Behold , the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple , and teaching the people .
Then went the captain with the officers , and brought them without violence : for they feared the people , lest they should have been stoned .
And when they had brought them , they set them before the council : and the high priest asked them .
Saying , Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name ? and , behold , ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine , and intend to bring this man ' s blood upon us .
Then Peter and the other apostles answered and said , We ought to obey God rather than men .
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus , whom ye slew and hanged on a tree .
Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour , for to give repentance to Israel , and forgiveness of sins .
And we are his witnesses of these things ; and so is also the Holy Ghost , whom God hath given to them that obey him .
When they heard that , they were cut to the heart , and took counsel to slay them .
Then stood there up one in the council , a Pharisee , named Gamaliel , a doctor of the law , had in reputation among all the people , and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space .
And said unto them , Ye men of Israel , take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men .
For before these days rose up Theudas , boasting himself to be somebody ; to whom a number of men , about four hundred , joined themselves : who was slain ; and all , as many as obeyed him , were scattered , and brought to nought .
After this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing , and drew away much people after him : he also perished ; and all , even as many as obeyed him , were dispersed .
And now I say unto you , Refrain from these men , and let them alone : for if this counsel or this work be of men , it will come to nought .
But if it be of God , ye cannot overthrow it ; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God .
And to him they agreed : and when they had called the apostles , and beaten them , they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus , and let them go .
And they departed from the presence of the council , rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name .
And daily in the temple , and in every house , they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ .
And in those days , when the number of the disciples was multiplied , there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews , because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration .
Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them , and said , It is not reason that we should leave the word of God , and serve tables .
Wherefore , brethren , look ye out among you seven men of honest report , full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom , whom we may appoint over this business .
But we will give ourselves continually to prayer , and to the ministry of the word .
And the saying pleased the whole multitude : and they chose Stephen , a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost , and Philip , and Prochorus , and Nicanor , and Timon , and Parmenas , and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch .
Whom they set before the apostles : and when they had prayed , they laid their hands on them .
And the word of God increased ; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly ; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith .
And Stephen , full of faith and power , did great wonders and miracles among the people .
Then there arose certain of the synagogue , which is called the synagogue of the Libertines , and Cyrenians , and Alexandrians , and of them of Cilicia and of Asia , disputing with Stephen .
And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake .
Then they suborned men , which said , We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses , and against God .
And they stirred up the people , and the elders , and the scribes , and came upon him , and caught him , and brought him to the council .
And set up false witnesses , which said , This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place , and the law .
For we have heard him say , that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place , and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us .
And all that sat in the council , looking stedfastly on him , saw his face as it had been the face of an angel .
Then said the high priest , Are these things so ?
And he said , Men , brethren , and fathers , hearken ; The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham , when he was in Mesopotamia , before he dwelt in Charran .
And said unto him , Get thee out of thy country , and from thy kindred , and come into the land which I shall shew thee .
Then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans , and dwelt in Charran : and from thence , when his father was dead , he removed him into this land , wherein ye now dwell .
And he gave him none inheritance in it , no , not so much as to set his foot on : yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession , and to his seed after him , when as yet he had no child .
And God spake on this wise , That his seed should sojourn in a strange land ; and that they should bring them into bondage , and entreat them evil four hundred years .
And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I judge , said God : and after that shall they come forth , and serve me in this place .
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision : and so Abraham begat Isaac , and circumcised him the eighth day ; and Isaac begat Jacob ; and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs .
And the patriarchs , moved with envy , sold Joseph into Egypt : but God was with him .
And delivered him out of all his afflictions , and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt ; and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house .
Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Chanaan , and great affliction : and our fathers found no sustenance .
But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt , he sent out our fathers first .
And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren ; and Joseph ' s kindred was made known unto Pharaoh .
Then sent Joseph , and called his father Jacob to him , and all his kindred , threescore and fifteen souls .
So Jacob went down into Egypt , and died , he , and our fathers .
And were carried over into Sychem , and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor the father of Sychem .
But when the time of the promise drew nigh , which God had sworn to Abraham , the people grew and multiplied in Egypt .
Till another king arose , which knew not Joseph .
The same dealt subtilly with our kindred , and evil entreated our fathers , so that they cast out their young children , to the end they might not live .
In which time Moses was born , and was exceeding fair , and nourished up in his father ' s house three months .
And when he was cast out , Pharaoh ' s daughter took him up , and nourished him for her own son .
And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians , and was mighty in words and in deeds .
And when he was full forty years old , it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel .
And seeing one of them suffer wrong , he defended him , and avenged him that was oppressed , and smote the Egyptian .
For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them : but they understood not .
And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove , and would have set them at one again , saying , Sirs , ye are brethren ; why do ye wrong one to another ?
But he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away , saying , Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us ?
Wilt thou kill me , as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday ?
Then fled Moses at this saying , and was a stranger in the land of Madian , where he begat two sons .
And when forty years were expired , there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sina an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush .
When Moses saw it , he wondered at the sight : and as he drew near to behold it , the voice of the Lord came unto him .
Saying , I am the God of thy fathers , the God of Abraham , and the God of Isaac , and the God of Jacob . Then Moses trembled , and durst not behold .
Then said the Lord to him , Put off thy shoes from thy feet : for the place where thou standest is holy ground .
I have seen , I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt , and I have heard their groaning , and am come down to deliver them . And now come , I will send thee into Egypt .
This Moses whom they refused , saying , Who made thee a ruler and a judge ? the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in the bush .
He brought them out , after that he had shewed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt , and in the Red sea , and in the wilderness forty years .
This is that Moses , which said unto the children of Israel , A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren , like unto me ; him shall ye hear .
This is he , that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina , and with our fathers : who received the lively oracles to give unto us .
To whom our fathers would not obey , but thrust him from them , and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt .
Saying unto Aaron , Make us gods to go before us : for as for this Moses , which brought us out of the land of Egypt , we wot not what is become of him .
And they made a calf in those days , and offered sacrifice unto the idol , and rejoiced in the works of their own hands .
Then God turned , and gave them up to worship the host of heaven ; as it is written in the book of the prophets , O ye house of Israel , have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness ?
Yea , ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch , and the star of your god Remphan , figures which ye made to worship them : and I will carry you away beyond Babylon .
Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness , as he had appointed , speaking unto Moses , that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen .
Which also our fathers that came after brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles , whom God drave out before the face of our fathers , unto the days of David .
Who found favour before God , and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob .
But Solomon built him an house .
Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands ; as saith the prophet .
Heaven is my throne , and earth is my footstool : what house will ye build me ? saith the Lord : or what is the place of my rest ?
Hath not my hand made all these things ?
Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears , ye do always resist the Holy Ghost : as your fathers did , so do ye .
Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted ? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One ; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers .
Who have received the law by the disposition of angels , and have not kept it .
When they heard these things , they were cut to the heart , and they gnashed on him with their teeth .
But he , being full of the Holy Ghost , looked up stedfastly into heaven , and saw the glory of God , and Jesus standing on the right hand of God .
And said , Behold , I see the heavens opened , and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God .
Then they cried out with a loud voice , and stopped their ears , and ran upon him with one accord .
And cast him out of the city , and stoned him : and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man ' s feet , whose name was Saul .
And they stoned Stephen , calling upon God , and saying , Lord Jesus , receive my spirit .
And he kneeled down , and cried with a loud voice , Lord , lay not this sin to their charge . And when he had said this , he fell asleep .
And Saul was consenting unto his death . And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem ; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judaea and Samaria , except the apostles .
And devout men carried Stephen to his burial , and made great lamentation over him .
As for Saul , he made havock of the church , entering into every house , and haling men and women committed them to prison .
Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word .
Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria , and preached Christ unto them .
And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake , hearing and seeing the miracles which he did .
For unclean spirits , crying with loud voice , came out of many that were possessed with them : and many taken with palsies , and that were lame , were healed .
And there was great joy in that city .
But there was a certain man , called Simon , which beforetime in the same city used sorcery , and bewitched the people of Samaria , giving out that himself was some great one .
To whom they all gave heed , from the least to the greatest , saying , This man is the great power of God .
And to him they had regard , because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries .
But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God , and the name of Jesus Christ , they were baptized , both men and women .
Then Simon himself believed also : and when he was baptized , he continued with Philip , and wondered , beholding the miracles and signs which were done .
Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God , they sent unto them Peter and John .
Who , when they were come down , prayed for them , that they might receive the Holy Ghost .
( For as yet he was fallen upon none of them : only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus . )
Then laid they their hands on them , and they received the Holy Ghost .
And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles ' hands the Holy Ghost was given , he offered them money .
Saying , Give me also this power , that on whomsoever I lay hands , he may receive the Holy Ghost .
But Peter said unto him , Thy money perish with thee , because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money .
Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter : for thy heart is not right in the sight of God .
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness , and pray God , if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee .
For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness , and in the bond of iniquity .
Then answered Simon , and said , Pray ye to the Lord for me , that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me .
And they , when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord , returned to Jerusalem , and preached the gospel in many villages of the Samaritans .
And the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip , saying , Arise , and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza , which is desert .
And he arose and went : and , behold , a man of Ethiopia , an eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians , who had the charge of all her treasure , and had come to Jerusalem for to worship .
Was returning , and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the prophet .
Then the Spirit said unto Philip , Go near , and join thyself to this chariot .
And Philip ran thither to him , and heard him read the prophet Esaias , and said , Understandest thou what thou readest ?
And he said , How can I , except some man should guide me ? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him .
The place of the scripture which he read was this , He was led as a sheep to the slaughter ; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer , so opened he not his mouth .
In his humiliation his judgment was taken away : and who shall declare his generation ? for his life is taken from the earth .
And the eunuch answered Philip , and said , I pray thee , of whom speaketh the prophet this ? of himself , or of some other man ?
Then Philip opened his mouth , and began at the same scripture , and preached unto him Jesus .
And as they went on their way , they came unto a certain water : and the eunuch said , See , here is water ; what doth hinder me to be baptized ?
And Philip said , If thou believest with all thine heart , thou mayest . And he answered and said , I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God .
And he commanded the chariot to stand still : and they went down both into the water , both Philip and the eunuch ; and he baptized him .
And when they were come up out of the water , the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip , that the eunuch saw him no more : and he went on his way rejoicing .
But Philip was found at Azotus : and passing through he preached in all the cities , till he came to Caesarea .
And Saul , yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord , went unto the high priest .
And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues , that if he found any of this way , whether they were men or women , he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem .
And as he journeyed , he came near Damascus : and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven .
And he fell to the earth , and heard a voice saying unto him , Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ?
And he said , Who art thou , Lord ? And the Lord said , I am Jesus whom thou persecutest : it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks .
And he trembling and astonished said , Lord , what wilt thou have me to do ? And the Lord said unto him , Arise , and go into the city , and it shall be told thee what thou must do .
And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless , hearing a voice , but seeing no man .
And Saul arose from the earth ; and when his eyes were opened , he saw no man : but they led him by the hand , and brought him into Damascus .
And he was three days without sight , and neither did eat nor drink .
And there was a certain disciple at Damascus , named Ananias ; and to him said the Lord in a vision , Ananias . And he said , Behold , I am here , Lord .
And the Lord said unto him , Arise , and go into the street which is called Straight , and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul , of Tarsus : for , behold , he prayeth .
And hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in , and putting his hand on him , that he might receive his sight .
Then Ananias answered , Lord , I have heard by many of this man , how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem .
And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name .
But the Lord said unto him , Go thy way : for he is a chosen vessel unto me , to bear my name before the Gentiles , and kings , and the children of Israel .
For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name ' s sake .
And Ananias went his way , and entered into the house ; and putting his hands on him said , Brother Saul , the Lord , even Jesus , that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest , hath sent me , that thou mightest receive thy sight , and be filled with the Holy Ghost .
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales : and he received sight forthwith , and arose , and was baptized .
And when he had received meat , he was strengthened . Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus .
And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues , that he is the Son of God .
But all that heard him were amazed , and said ; Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem , and came hither for that intent , that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests ?
But Saul increased the more in strength , and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus , proving that this is very Christ .
And after that many days were fulfilled , the Jews took counsel to kill him .
But their laying await was known of Saul . And they watched the gates day and night to kill him .
Then the disciples took him by night , and let him down by the wall in a basket .
And when Saul was come to Jerusalem , he assayed to join himself to the disciples : but they were all afraid of him , and believed not that he was a disciple .
But Barnabas took him , and brought him to the apostles , and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way , and that he had spoken to him , and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus .
And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem .
And he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus , and disputed against the Grecians : but they went about to slay him .
Which when the brethren knew , they brought him down to Caesarea , and sent him forth to Tarsus .
Then had the churches rest throughout all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria , and were edified ; and walking in the fear of the Lord , and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost , were multiplied .
And it came to pass , as Peter passed throughout all quarters , he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda .
And there he found a certain man named Aeneas , which had kept his bed eight years , and was sick of the palsy .
And Peter said unto him , Aeneas , Jesus Christ maketh thee whole : arise , and make thy bed . And he arose immediately .
And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him , and turned to the Lord .
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha , which by interpretation is called Dorcas : this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did .
And it came to pass in those days , that she was sick , and died : whom when they had washed , they laid her in an upper chamber .
And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa , and the disciples had heard that Peter was there , they sent unto him two men , desiring him that he would not delay to come to them .
Then Peter arose and went with them . When he was come , they brought him into the upper chamber : and all the widows stood by him weeping , and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made , while she was with them .
But Peter put them all forth , and kneeled down , and prayed ; and turning him to the body said , Tabitha , arise . And she opened her eyes : and when she saw Peter , she sat up .
And he gave her his hand , and lifted her up , and when he had called the saints and widows , presented her alive .
And it was known throughout all Joppa ; and many believed in the Lord .
And it came to pass , that he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner .
There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius , a centurion of the band called the Italian band .
A devout man , and one that feared God with all his house , which gave much alms to the people , and prayed to God alway .
He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in to him , and saying unto him , Cornelius .
And when he looked on him , he was afraid , and said , What is it , Lord ? And he said unto him , Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God .
And now send men to Joppa , and call for one Simon , whose surname is Peter .
He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner , whose house is by the sea side : he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do .
And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was departed , he called two of his household servants , and a devout soldier of them that waited on him continually .
And when he had declared all these things unto them , he sent them to Joppa .
On the morrow , as they went on their journey , and drew nigh unto the city , Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour .
And he became very hungry , and would have eaten : but while they made ready , he fell into a trance .
And saw heaven opened , and a certain vessel descending unto him , as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners , and let down to the earth .
Wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth , and wild beasts , and creeping things , and fowls of the air .
And there came a voice to him , Rise , Peter ; kill , and eat .
But Peter said , Not so , Lord ; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean .
And the voice spake unto him again the second time , What God hath cleansed , that call not thou common .
This was done thrice : and the vessel was received up again into heaven .
Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen should mean , behold , the men which were sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon ' s house , and stood before the gate .
And called , and asked whether Simon , which was surnamed Peter , were lodged there .
While Peter thought on the vision , the Spirit said unto him , Behold , three men seek thee .
Arise therefore , and get thee down , and go with them , doubting nothing : for I have sent them .
Then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius ; and said , Behold , I am he whom ye seek : what is the cause wherefore ye are come ?
And they said , Cornelius the centurion , a just man , and one that feareth God , and of good report among all the nation of the Jews , was warned from God by an holy angel to send for thee into his house , and to hear words of thee .
Then called he them in , and lodged them . And on the morrow Peter went away with them , and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him .
And the morrow after they entered into Caesarea . And Cornelius waited for them , and had called together his kinsmen and near friends .
And as Peter was coming in , Cornelius met him , and fell down at his feet , and worshipped him .
But Peter took him up , saying , Stand up ; I myself also am a man .
And as he talked with him , he went in , and found many that were come together .
And he said unto them , Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company , or come unto one of another nation ; but God hath shewed me that I should not call any man common or unclean .
Therefore came I unto you without gainsaying , as soon as I was sent for : I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me ?
And Cornelius said , Four days ago I was fasting until this hour ; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house , and , behold , a man stood before me in bright clothing .
And said , Cornelius , thy prayer is heard , and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God .
Send therefore to Joppa , and call hither Simon , whose surname is Peter ; he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner by the sea side : who , when he cometh , shall speak unto thee .
Immediately therefore I sent to thee ; and thou hast well done that thou art come . Now therefore are we all here present before God , to hear all things that are commanded thee of God .
Then Peter opened his mouth , and said , Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons .
But in every nation he that feareth him , and worketh righteousness , is accepted with him .
The word which God sent unto the children of Israel , preaching peace by Jesus Christ : ( he is Lord of all : )
That word , I say , ye know , which was published throughout all Judaea , and began from Galilee , after the baptism which John preached .
How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power : who went about doing good , and healing all that were oppressed of the devil ; for God was with him .
And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the Jews , and in Jerusalem ; whom they slew and hanged on a tree .
Him God raised up the third day , and shewed him openly .
Not to all the people , but unto witnesses chosen before of God , even to us , who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead .
And he commanded us to preach unto the people , and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead .
To him give all the prophets witness , that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins .
While Peter yet spake these words , the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word .
And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished , as many as came with Peter , because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost .
For they heard them speak with tongues , and magnify God . Then answered Peter .
Can any man forbid water , that these should not be baptized , which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we ?
And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord . Then prayed they him to tarry certain days .
And the apostles and brethren that were in Judaea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God .
And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem , they that were of the circumcision contended with him .
Saying , Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised , and didst eat with them .
But Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning , and expounded it by order unto them , saying .
I was in the city of Joppa praying : and in a trance I saw a vision , A certain vessel descend , as it had been a great sheet , let down from heaven by four corners ; and it came even to me .
Upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes , I considered , and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth , and wild beasts , and creeping things , and fowls of the air .
And I heard a voice saying unto me , Arise , Peter ; slay and eat .
But I said , Not so , Lord : for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth .
But the voice answered me again from heaven , What God hath cleansed , that call not thou common .
And this was done three times : and all were drawn up again into heaven .
And , behold , immediately there were three men already come unto the house where I was , sent from Caesarea unto me .
And the Spirit bade me go with them , nothing doubting . Moreover these six brethren accompanied me , and we entered into the man ' s house .
And he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house , which stood and said unto him , Send men to Joppa , and call for Simon , whose surname is Peter .
Who shall tell thee words , whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved .
And as I began to speak , the Holy Ghost fell on them , as on us at the beginning .
Then remembered I the word of the Lord , how that he said , John indeed baptized with water ; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost .
Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us , who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ ; what was I , that I could withstand God ?
When they heard these things , they held their peace , and glorified God , saying , Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life .
Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice , and Cyprus , and Antioch , preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only .
And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene , which , when they were come to Antioch , spake unto the Grecians , preaching the Lord Jesus .
And the hand of the Lord was with them : and a great number believed , and turned unto the Lord .
Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem : and they sent forth Barnabas , that he should go as far as Antioch .
Who , when he came , and had seen the grace of God , was glad , and exhorted them all , that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord .
For he was a good man , and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith : and much people was added unto the Lord .
Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus , for to seek Saul .
And when he had found him , he brought him unto Antioch . And it came to pass , that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church , and taught much people . And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch .
And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch .
And there stood up one of them named Agabus , and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world : which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar .
Then the disciples , every man according to his ability , determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea .
Which also they did , and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul .
Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church .
And he killed James the brother of John with the sword .
And because he saw it pleased the Jews , he proceeded further to take Peter also . ( Then were the days of unleavened bread . )
And when he had apprehended him , he put him in prison , and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him ; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people .
Peter therefore was kept in prison : but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him .
And when Herod would have brought him forth , the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers , bound with two chains : and the keepers before the door kept the prison .
And , behold , the angel of the Lord came upon him , and a light shined in the prison : and he smote Peter on the side , and raised him up , saying , Arise up quickly . And his chains fell off from his hands .
And the angel said unto him , Gird thyself , and bind on thy sandals . And so he did . And he saith unto him , Cast thy garment about thee , and follow me .
And he went out , and followed him ; and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel ; but thought he saw a vision .
When they were past the first and the second ward , they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city ; which opened to them of his own accord : and they went out , and passed on through one street ; and forthwith the angel departed from him .
And when Peter was come to himself , he said , Now I know of a surety , that the Lord hath sent his angel , and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod , and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews .
And when he had considered the thing , he came to the house of Mary the mother of John , whose surname was Mark ; where many were gathered together praying .
And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate , a damsel came to hearken , named Rhoda .
And when she knew Peter ' s voice , she opened not the gate for gladness , but ran in , and told how Peter stood before the gate .
And they said unto her , Thou art mad . But she constantly affirmed that it was even so . Then said they , It is his angel .
But Peter continued knocking : and when they had opened the door , and saw him , they were astonished .
But he , beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace , declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison . And he said , Go shew these things unto James , and to the brethren . And he departed , and went into another place .
Now as soon as it was day , there was no small stir among the soldiers , what was become of Peter .
And when Herod had sought for him , and found him not , he examined the keepers , and commanded that they should be put to death . And he went down from Judaea to Caesarea , and there abode .
And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon : but they came with one accord to him , and , having made Blastus the king ' s chamberlain their friend , desired peace ; because their country was nourished by the king ' s country .
And upon a set day Herod , arrayed in royal apparel , sat upon his throne , and made an oration unto them .
And the people gave a shout , saying , It is the voice of a god , and not of a man .
And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him , because he gave not God the glory : and he was eaten of worms , and gave up the ghost .
But the word of God grew and multiplied .
And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem , when they had fulfilled their ministry , and took with them John , whose surname was Mark .
Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers ; as Barnabas , and Simeon that was called Niger , and Lucius of Cyrene , and Manaen , which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch , and Saul .
As they ministered to the Lord , and fasted , the Holy Ghost said , Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them .
And when they had fasted and prayed , and laid their hands on them , they sent them away .
So they , being sent forth by the Holy Ghost , departed unto Seleucia ; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus .
And when they were at Salamis , they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews : and they had also John to their minister .
And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos , they found a certain sorcerer , a false prophet , a Jew , whose name was Bar - jesus .
Which was with the deputy of the country , Sergius Paulus , a prudent man ; who called for Barnabas and Saul , and desired to hear the word of God .
But Elymas the sorcerer ( for so is his name by interpretation ) withstood them , seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith .
Then Saul , ( who also is called Paul , ) filled with the Holy Ghost , set his eyes on him .
And said , O full of all subtilty and all mischief , thou child of the devil , thou enemy of all righteousness , wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord ?
And now , behold , the hand of the Lord is upon thee , and thou shalt be blind , not seeing the sun for a season . And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness ; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand .
Then the deputy , when he saw what was done , believed , being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord .
Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos , they came to Perga in Pamphylia : and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem .
But when they departed from Perga , they came to Antioch in Pisidia , and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day , and sat down .
And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them , saying , Ye men and brethren , if ye have any word of exhortation for the people , say on .
Then Paul stood up , and beckoning with his hand said , Men of Israel , and ye that fear God , give audience .
The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers , and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt , and with an high arm brought he them out of it .
And about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness .
And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan , he divided their land to them by lot .
And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years , until Samuel the prophet .
And afterward they desired a king : and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis , a man of the tribe of Benjamin , by the space of forty years .
And when he had removed him , he raised up unto them David to be their king ; to whom also he gave testimony , and said , I have found David the son of Jesse , a man after mine own heart , which shall fulfil all my will .
Of this man ' s seed hath God according to his promise raised unto Israel a Saviour , Jesus .
When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel .
And as John fulfilled his course , he said , Whom think ye that I am ? I am not he . But , behold , there cometh one after me , whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose .
Men and brethren , children of the stock of Abraham , and whosoever among you feareth God , to you is the word of this salvation sent .
For they that dwell at Jerusalem , and their rulers , because they knew him not , nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day , they have fulfilled them in condemning him .
And though they found no cause of death in him , yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain .
And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him , they took him down from the tree , and laid him in a sepulchre .
But God raised him from the dead .
And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem , who are his witnesses unto the people .
And we declare unto you glad tidings , how that the promise which was made unto the fathers .
God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children , in that he hath raised up Jesus again ; as it is also written in the second psalm , Thou art my Son , this day have I begotten thee .
And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead , now no more to return to corruption , he said on this wise , I will give you the sure mercies of David .
Wherefore he saith also in another psalm , Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption .
For David , after he had served his own generation by the will of God , fell on sleep , and was laid unto his fathers , and saw corruption .
But he , whom God raised again , saw no corruption .
Be it known unto you therefore , men and brethren , that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins .
And by him all that believe are justified from all things , from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses .
Beware therefore , lest that come upon you , which is spoken of in the prophets .
Behold , ye despisers , and wonder , and perish : for I work a work in your days , a work which ye shall in no wise believe , though a man declare it unto you .
And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue , the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath .
Now when the congregation was broken up , many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas : who , speaking to them , persuaded them to continue in the grace of God .
And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God .
But when the Jews saw the multitudes , they were filled with envy , and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul , contradicting and blaspheming .
Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold , and said , It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you : but seeing ye put it from you , and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life , lo , we turn to the Gentiles .
For so hath the Lord commanded us , saying , I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles , that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth .
And when the Gentiles heard this , they were glad , and glorified the word of the Lord : and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed .
And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region .
But the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women , and the chief men of the city , and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas , and expelled them out of their coasts .
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them , and came unto Iconium .
And the disciples were filled with joy , and with the Holy Ghost .
And it came to pass in Iconium , that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews , and so spake , that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks believed .
But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles , and made their minds evil affected against the brethren .
Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord , which gave testimony unto the word of his grace , and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands .
But the multitude of the city was divided : and part held with the Jews , and part with the apostles .
And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles , and also of the Jews with their rulers , to use them despitefully , and to stone them .
They were ware of it , and fled unto Lystra and Derbe , cities of Lycaonia , and unto the region that lieth round about .
And there they preached the gospel .
And there sat a certain man at Lystra , impotent in his feet , being a cripple from his mother ' s womb , who never had walked .
The same heard Paul speak : who stedfastly beholding him , and perceiving that he had faith to be healed .
Said with a loud voice , Stand upright on thy feet . And he leaped and walked .
And when the people saw what Paul had done , they lifted up their voices , saying in the speech of Lycaonia , The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men .
And they called Barnabas , Jupiter ; and Paul , Mercurius , because he was the chief speaker .
Then the priest of Jupiter , which was before their city , brought oxen and garlands unto the gates , and would have done sacrifice with the people .
Which when the apostles , Barnabas and Paul , heard of , they rent their clothes , and ran in among the people , crying out .
And saying , Sirs , why do ye these things ? We also are men of like passions with you , and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God , which made heaven , and earth , and the sea , and all things that are therein .
Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways .
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness , in that he did good , and gave us rain from heaven , and fruitful seasons , filling our hearts with food and gladness .
And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people , that they had not done sacrifice unto them .
And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium , who persuaded the people , and , having stoned Paul , drew him out of the city , supposing he had been dead .
Howbeit , as the disciples stood round about him , he rose up , and came into the city : and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe .
And when they had preached the gospel to that city , and had taught many , they returned again to Lystra , and to Iconium , and Antioch .
Confirming the souls of the disciples , and exhorting them to continue in the faith , and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God .
And when they had ordained them elders in every church , and had prayed with fasting , they commended them to the Lord , on whom they believed .
And after they had passed throughout Pisidia , they came to Pamphylia .
And when they had preached the word in Perga , they went down into Attalia .
And thence sailed to Antioch , from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled .
And when they were come , and had gathered the church together , they rehearsed all that God had done with them , and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles .
And there they abode long time with the disciples .
And certain men which came down from Judaea taught the brethren , and said , Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses , ye cannot be saved .
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them , they determined that Paul and Barnabas , and certain other of them , should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question .
And being brought on their way by the church , they passed through Phenice and Samaria , declaring the conversion of the Gentiles : and they caused great joy unto all the brethren .
And when they were come to Jerusalem , they were received of the church , and of the apostles and elders , and they declared all things that God had done with them .
But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed , saying , That it was needful to circumcise them , and to command them to keep the law of Moses .
And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter .
And when there had been much disputing , Peter rose up , and said unto them , Men and brethren , ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us , that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel , and believe .
And God , which knoweth the hearts , bare them witness , giving them the Holy Ghost , even as he did unto us .
And put no difference between us and them , purifying their hearts by faith .
Now therefore why tempt ye God , to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples , which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear ?
But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved , even as they .
Then all the multitude kept silence , and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul , declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them .
And after they had held their peace , James answered , saying , Men and brethren , hearken unto me .
Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles , to take out of them a people for his name .
And to this agree the words of the prophets ; as it is written .
After this I will return , and will build again the tabernacle of David , which is fallen down ; and I will build again the ruins thereof , and I will set it up .
That the residue of men might seek after the Lord , and all the Gentiles , upon whom my name is called , saith the Lord , who doeth all these things .
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world .
Wherefore my sentence is , that we trouble not them , which from among the Gentiles are turned to God .
But that we write unto them , that they abstain from pollutions of idols , and from fornication , and from things strangled , and from blood .
For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him , being read in the synagogues every sabbath day .
Then pleased it the apostles and elders , with the whole church , to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas ; namely , Judas surnamed Barsabas , and Silas , chief men among the brethren .
And they wrote letters by them after this manner ; The apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia .
Forasmuch as we have heard , that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words , subverting your souls , saying , Ye must be circumcised , and keep the law : to whom we gave no such commandment .
It seemed good unto us , being assembled with one accord , to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul .
Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas , who shall also tell you the same things by mouth .
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost , and to us , to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things .
That ye abstain from meats offered to idols , and from blood , and from things strangled , and from fornication : from which if ye keep yourselves , ye shall do well . Fare ye well .
So when they were dismissed , they came to Antioch : and when they had gathered the multitude together , they delivered the epistle .
Which when they had read , they rejoiced for the consolation .
And Judas and Silas , being prophets also themselves , exhorted the brethren with many words , and confirmed them .
And after they had tarried there a space , they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the apostles .
Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still .
Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch , teaching and preaching the word of the Lord , with many others also .
And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas , Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord , and see how they do .
And Barnabas determined to take with them John , whose surname was Mark .
But Paul thought not good to take him with them , who departed from them from Pamphylia , and went not with them to the work .
And the contention was so sharp between them , that they departed asunder one from the other : and so Barnabas took Mark , and sailed unto Cyprus .
And Paul chose Silas , and departed , being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God .
And he went through Syria and Cilicia , confirming the churches .
Then came he to Derbe and Lystra : and , behold , a certain disciple was there , named Timotheus , the son of a certain woman , which was a Jewess , and believed ; but his father was a Greek .
Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium .
Him would Paul have to go forth with him ; and took and circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those quarters : for they knew all that his father was a Greek .
And as they went through the cities , they delivered them the decrees for to keep , that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem .
And so were the churches established in the faith , and increased in number daily .
Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia , and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia .
After they were come to Mysia , they assayed to go into Bithynia : but the Spirit suffered them not .
And they passing by Mysia came down to Troas .
And a vision appeared to Paul in the night ; There stood a man of Macedonia , and prayed him , saying , Come over into Macedonia , and help us .
And after he had seen the vision , immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia , assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them .
Therefore loosing from Troas , we came with a straight course to Samothracia , and the next day to Neapolis .
And from thence to Philippi , which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia , and a colony : and we were in that city abiding certain days .
And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side , where prayer was wont to be made ; and we sat down , and spake unto the women which resorted thither .
And a certain woman named Lydia , a seller of purple , of the city of Thyatira , which worshipped God , heard us : whose heart the Lord opened , that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul .
And when she was baptized , and her household , she besought us , saying , If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord , come into my house , and abide there . And she constrained us .
And it came to pass , as we went to prayer , a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us , which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying .
The same followed Paul and us , and cried , saying , These men are the servants of the most high God , which shew unto us the way of salvation .
And this did she many days . But Paul , being grieved , turned and said to the spirit , I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her . And he came out the same hour .
And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone , they caught Paul and Silas , and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers .
And brought them to the magistrates , saying , These men , being Jews , do exceedingly trouble our city .
And teach customs , which are not lawful for us to receive , neither to observe , being Romans .
And the multitude rose up together against them : and the magistrates rent off their clothes , and commanded to beat them .
And when they had laid many stripes upon them , they cast them into prison , charging the jailor to keep them safely .
Who , having received such a charge , thrust them into the inner prison , and made their feet fast in the stocks .
And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed , and sang praises unto God : and the prisoners heard them .
And suddenly there was a great earthquake , so that the foundations of the prison were shaken : and immediately all the doors were opened , and every one ' s bands were loosed .
And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep , and seeing the prison doors open , he drew out his sword , and would have killed himself , supposing that the prisoners had been fled .
But Paul cried with a loud voice , saying , Do thyself no harm : for we are all here .
Then he called for a light , and sprang in , and came trembling , and fell down before Paul and Silas .
And brought them out , and said , Sirs , what must I do to be saved ?
And they said , Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ , and thou shalt be saved , and thy house .
And they spake unto him the word of the Lord , and to all that were in his house .
And he took them the same hour of the night , and washed their stripes ; and was baptized , he and all his , straightway .
And when he had brought them into his house , he set meat before them , and rejoiced , believing in God with all his house .
And when it was day , the magistrates sent the serjeants , saying , Let those men go .
And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul , The magistrates have sent to let you go : now therefore depart , and go in peace .
But Paul said unto them , They have beaten us openly uncondemned , being Romans , and have cast us into prison ; and now do they thrust us out privily ? nay verily ; but let them come themselves and fetch us out .
And the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates : and they feared , when they heard that they were Romans .
And they came and besought them , and brought them out , and desired them to depart out of the city .
And they went out of the prison , and entered into the house of Lydia : and when they had seen the brethren , they comforted them , and departed .
Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia , they came to Thessalonica , where was a synagogue of the Jews .
And Paul , as his manner was , went in unto them , and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures .
Opening and alleging , that Christ must needs have suffered , and risen again from the dead ; and that this Jesus , whom I preach unto you , is Christ .
And some of them believed , and consorted with Paul and Silas ; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude , and of the chief women not a few .
But the Jews which believed not , moved with envy , took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort , and gathered a company , and set all the city on an uproar , and assaulted the house of Jason , and sought to bring them out to the people .
And when they found them not , they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city , crying , These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also .
Whom Jason hath received : and these all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar , saying that there is another king , one Jesus .
And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city , when they heard these things .
And when they had taken security of Jason , and of the other , they let them go .
And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea : who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews .
These were more noble than those in Thessalonica , in that they received the word with all readiness of mind , and searched the scriptures daily , whether those things were so .
Therefore many of them believed ; also of honourable women which were Greeks , and of men , not a few .
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea , they came thither also , and stirred up the people .
And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea : but Silas and Timotheus abode there still .
And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens : and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with all speed , they departed .
Now while Paul waited for them at Athens , his spirit was stirred in him , when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry .
Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews , and with the devout persons , and in the market daily with them that met with him .
Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans , and of the Stoicks , encountered him . And some said , What will this babbler say ? other some , He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods : because he preached unto them Jesus , and the resurrection .
And they took him , and brought him unto Areopagus , saying , May we know what this new doctrine , whereof thou speakest , is ?
For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears : we would know therefore what these things mean .
( For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else , but either to tell , or to hear some new thing . )
Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars ' hill , and said , Ye men of Athens , I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious .
For as I passed by , and beheld your devotions , I found an altar with this inscription , TO THE UNKNOWN GOD . Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship , him declare I unto you .
God that made the world and all things therein , seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth , dwelleth not in temples made with hands .
Neither is worshipped with men ' s hands , as though he needed any thing , seeing he giveth to all life , and breath , and all things .
And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth , and hath determined the times before appointed , and the bounds of their habitation .
That they should seek the Lord , if haply they might feel after him , and find him , though he be not far from every one of us .
For in him we live , and move , and have our being ; as certain also of your own poets have said , For we are also his offspring .
Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God , we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold , or silver , or stone , graven by art and man ' s device .
And the times of this ignorance God winked at ; but now commandeth all men every where to repent .
Because he hath appointed a day , in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained ; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men , in that he hath raised him from the dead .
And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead , some mocked : and others said , We will hear thee again of this matter .
So Paul departed from among them .
Howbeit certain men clave unto him , and believed : among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite , and a woman named Damaris , and others with them .
After these things Paul departed from Athens , and came to Corinth .
And found a certain Jew named Aquila , born in Pontus , lately come from Italy , with his wife Priscilla ; ( because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome : ) and came unto them .
And because he was of the same craft , he abode with them , and wrought : for by their occupation they were tentmakers .
And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath , and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks .
And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia , Paul was pressed in the spirit , and testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ .
And when they opposed themselves , and blasphemed , he shook his raiment , and said unto them , Your blood be upon your own heads ; I am clean : from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles .
And he departed thence , and entered into a certain man ' s house , named Justus , one that worshipped God , whose house joined hard to the synagogue .
And Crispus , the chief ruler of the synagogue , believed on the Lord with all his house ; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed , and were baptized .
Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision , Be not afraid , but speak , and hold not thy peace .
For I am with thee , and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee : for I have much people in this city .
And he continued there a year and six months , teaching the word of God among them .
And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia , the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul , and brought him to the judgment seat .
Saying , This fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law .
And when Paul was now about to open his mouth , Gallio said unto the Jews , If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness , O ye Jews , reason would that I should bear with you .
But if it be a question of words and names , and of your law , look ye to it ; for I will be no judge of such matters .
And he drave them from the judgment seat .
Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes , the chief ruler of the synagogue , and beat him before the judgment seat . And Gallio cared for none of those things .
And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while , and then took his leave of the brethren , and sailed thence into Syria , and with him Priscilla and Aquila ; having shorn his head in Cenchrea : for he had a vow .
And he came to Ephesus , and left them there : but he himself entered into the synagogue , and reasoned with the Jews .
When they desired him to tarry longer time with them , he consented not .
But bade them farewell , saying , I must by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem : but I will return again unto you , if God will . And he sailed from Ephesus .
And when he had landed at Caesarea , and gone up , and saluted the church , he went down to Antioch .
And after he had spent some time there , he departed , and went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order , strengthening all the disciples .
And a certain Jew named Apollos , born at Alexandria , an eloquent man , and mighty in the scriptures , came to Ephesus .
This man was instructed in the way of the Lord ; and being fervent in the spirit , he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord , knowing only the baptism of John .
And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue : whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard , they took him unto them , and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly .
And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia , the brethren wrote , exhorting the disciples to receive him : who , when he was come , helped them much which had believed through grace .
For he mightily convinced the Jews , and that publickly , shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ .
And it came to pass , that , while Apollos was at Corinth , Paul having passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus : and finding certain disciples .
He said unto them , Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed ? And they said unto him , We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost .
And he said unto them , Unto what then were ye baptized ? And they said , Unto John ' s baptism .
Then said Paul , John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance , saying unto the people , that they should believe on him which should come after him , that is , on Christ Jesus .
When they heard this , they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus .
And when Paul had laid his hands upon them , the Holy Ghost came on them ; and they spake with tongues , and prophesied .
And all the men were about twelve .
And he went into the synagogue , and spake boldly for the space of three months , disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God .
But when divers were hardened , and believed not , but spake evil of that way before the multitude , he departed from them , and separated the disciples , disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus .
And this continued by the space of two years ; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus , both Jews and Greeks .
And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul .
So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons , and the diseases departed from them , and the evil spirits went out of them .
Then certain of the vagabond Jews , exorcists , took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus , saying , We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth .
And there were seven sons of one Sceva , a Jew , and chief of the priests , which did so .
And the evil spirit answered and said , Jesus I know , and Paul I know ; but who are ye ?
And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them , and overcame them , and prevailed against them , so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded .
And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus ; and fear fell on them all , and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified .
And many that believed came , and confessed , and shewed their deeds .
Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together , and burned them before all men : and they counted the price of them , and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver .
So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed .
After these things were ended , Paul purposed in the spirit , when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia , to go to Jerusalem , saying , After I have been there , I must also see Rome .
So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him , Timotheus and Erastus ; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season .
And the same time there arose no small stir about that way .
For a certain man named Demetrius , a silversmith , which made silver shrines for Diana , brought no small gain unto the craftsmen .
Whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation , and said , Sirs , ye know that by this craft we have our wealth .
Moreover ye see and hear , that not alone at Ephesus , but almost throughout all Asia , this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people , saying that they be no gods , which are made with hands .
So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought ; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised , and her magnificence should be destroyed , whom all Asia and the world worshippeth .
And when they heard these sayings , they were full of wrath , and cried out , saying , Great is Diana of the Ephesians .
And the whole city was filled with confusion : and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus , men of Macedonia , Paul ' s companions in travel , they rushed with one accord into the theatre .
And when Paul would have entered in unto the people , the disciples suffered him not .
And certain of the chief of Asia , which were his friends , sent unto him , desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theatre .
Some therefore cried one thing , and some another : for the assembly was confused ; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together .
And they drew Alexander out of the multitude , the Jews putting him forward . And Alexander beckoned with the hand , and would have made his defence unto the people .
But when they knew that he was a Jew , all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out , Great is Diana of the Ephesians .
And when the townclerk had appeased the people , he said , Ye men of Ephesus , what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana , and of the image which fell down from Jupiter ?
Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against , ye ought to be quiet , and to do nothing rashly .
For ye have brought hither these men , which are neither robbers of churches , nor yet blasphemers of your goddess .
Wherefore if Demetrius , and the craftsmen which are with him , have a matter against any man , the law is open , and there are deputies : let them implead one another .
But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters , it shall be determined in a lawful assembly .
For we are in danger to be called in question for this day ' s uproar , there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse .
And when he had thus spoken , he dismissed the assembly .
And after the uproar was ceased , Paul called unto him the disciples , and embraced them , and departed for to go into Macedonia .
And when he had gone over those parts , and had given them much exhortation , he came into Greece .
And there abode three months . And when the Jews laid wait for him , as he was about to sail into Syria , he purposed to return through Macedonia .
And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea ; and of the Thessalonians , Aristarchus and Secundus ; and Gaius of Derbe , and Timotheus ; and of Asia , Tychicus and Trophimus .
These going before tarried for us at Troas .
And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread , and came unto them to Troas in five days ; where we abode seven days .
And upon the first day of the week , when the disciples came together to break bread , Paul preached unto them , ready to depart on the morrow ; and continued his speech until midnight .
And there were many lights in the upper chamber , where they were gathered together .
And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus , being fallen into a deep sleep : and as Paul was long preaching , he sunk down with sleep , and fell down from the third loft , and was taken up dead .
And Paul went down , and fell on him , and embracing him said , Trouble not yourselves ; for his life is in him .
When he therefore was come up again , and had broken bread , and eaten , and talked a long while , even till break of day , so he departed .
And they brought the young man alive , and were not a little comforted .
And we went before to ship , and sailed unto Assos , there intending to take in Paul : for so had he appointed , minding himself to go afoot .
And when he met with us at Assos , we took him in , and came to Mitylene .
And we sailed thence , and came the next day over against Chios ; and the next day we arrived at Samos , and tarried at Trogyllium ; and the next day we came to Miletus .
For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus , because he would not spend the time in Asia : for he hasted , if it were possible for him , to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost .
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus , and called the elders of the church .
And when they were come to him , he said unto them , Ye know , from the first day that I came into Asia , after what manner I have been with you at all seasons .
Serving the Lord with all humility of mind , and with many tears , and temptations , which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews .
And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you , but have shewed you , and have taught you publickly , and from house to house .
Testifying both to the Jews , and also to the Greeks , repentance toward God , and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ .
And now , behold , I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem , not knowing the things that shall befall me there .
Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city , saying that bonds and afflictions abide me .
But none of these things move me , neither count I my life dear unto myself , so that I might finish my course with joy , and the ministry , which I have received of the Lord Jesus , to testify the gospel of the grace of God .
And now , behold , I know that ye all , among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God , shall see my face no more .
Wherefore I take you to record this day , that I am pure from the blood of all men .
For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God .
Take heed therefore unto yourselves , and to all the flock , over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers , to feed the church of God , which he hath purchased with his own blood .
For I know this , that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you , not sparing the flock .
Also of your own selves shall men arise , speaking perverse things , to draw away disciples after them .
Therefore watch , and remember , that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears .
And now , brethren , I commend you to God , and to the word of his grace , which is able to build you up , and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified .
I have coveted no man ' s silver , or gold , or apparel .
Yea , ye yourselves know , that these hands have ministered unto my necessities , and to them that were with me .
I have shewed you all things , how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak , and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus , how he said , It is more blessed to give than to receive .
And when he had thus spoken , he kneeled down , and prayed with them all .
And they all wept sore , and fell on Paul ' s neck , and kissed him .
Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake , that they should see his face no more . And they accompanied him unto the ship .
And it came to pass , that after we were gotten from them , and had launched , we came with a straight course unto Coos , and the day following unto Rhodes , and from thence unto Patara .
And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia , we went aboard , and set forth .
Now when we had discovered Cyprus , we left it on the left hand , and sailed into Syria , and landed at Tyre : for there the ship was to unlade her burden .
And finding disciples , we tarried there seven days : who said to Paul through the Spirit , that he should not go up to Jerusalem .
And when we had accomplished those days , we departed and went our way ; and they all brought us on our way , with wives and children , till we were out of the city : and we kneeled down on the shore , and prayed .
And when we had taken our leave one of another , we took ship ; and they returned home again .
And when we had finished our course from Tyre , we came to Ptolemais , and saluted the brethren , and abode with them one day .
And the next day we that were of Paul ' s company departed , and came unto Caesarea : and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist , which was one of the seven ; and abode with him .
And the same man had four daughters , virgins , which did prophesy .
And as we tarried there many days , there came down from Judaea a certain prophet , named Agabus .
And when he was come unto us , he took Paul ' s girdle , and bound his own hands and feet , and said , Thus saith the Holy Ghost , So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle , and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles .
And when we heard these things , both we , and they of that place , besought him not to go up to Jerusalem .
Then Paul answered , What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart ? for I am ready not to be bound only , but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus .
And when he would not be persuaded , we ceased , saying , The will of the Lord be done .
And after those days we took up our carriages , and went up to Jerusalem .
There went with us also certain of the disciples of Caesarea , and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus , an old disciple , with whom we should lodge .
And when we were come to Jerusalem , the brethren received us gladly .
And the day following Paul went in with us unto James ; and all the elders were present .
And when he had saluted them , he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry .
And when they heard it , they glorified the Lord , and said unto him , Thou seest , brother , how many thousands of Jews there are which believe ; and they are all zealous of the law .
And they are informed of thee , that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses , saying that they ought not to circumcise their children , neither to walk after the customs .
What is it therefore ? the multitude must needs come together : for they will hear that thou art come .
Do therefore this that we say to thee : We have four men which have a vow on them .
Them take , and purify thyself with them , and be at charges with them , that they may shave their heads : and all may know that those things , whereof they were informed concerning thee , are nothing ; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly , and keepest the law .
As touching the Gentiles which believe , we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing , save only that they keep themselves from things offered to idols , and from blood , and from strangled , and from fornication .
Then Paul took the men , and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple , to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification , until that an offering should be offered for every one of them .
And when the seven days were almost ended , the Jews which were of Asia , when they saw him in the temple , stirred up all the people , and laid hands on him .
Crying out , Men of Israel , help : This is the man , that teacheth all men every where against the people , and the law , and this place : and further brought Greeks also into the temple , and hath polluted this holy place .
( For they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian , whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple . )
And all the city was moved , and the people ran together : and they took Paul , and drew him out of the temple : and forthwith the doors were shut .
And as they went about to kill him , tidings came unto the chief captain of the band , that all Jerusalem was in an uproar .
Who immediately took soldiers and centurions , and ran down unto them : and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers , they left beating of Paul .
Then the chief captain came near , and took him , and commanded him to be bound with two chains ; and demanded who he was , and what he had done .
And some cried one thing , some another , among the multitude : and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult , he commanded him to be carried into the castle .
And when he came upon the stairs , so it was , that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the people .
For the multitude of the people followed after , crying , Away with him .
And as Paul was to be led into the castle , he said unto the chief captain , May I speak unto thee ? Who said , Canst thou speak Greek ?
Art not thou that Egyptian , which before these days madest an uproar , and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers ?
But Paul said , I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus , a city in Cilicia , a citizen of no mean city : and , I beseech thee , suffer me to speak unto the people .
And when he had given him licence , Paul stood on the stairs , and beckoned with the hand unto the people . And when there was made a great silence , he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue , saying .
Men , brethren , and fathers , hear ye my defence which I make now unto you .
( And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them , they kept the more silence : and he saith , )
I am verily a man which am a Jew , born in Tarsus , a city in Cilicia , yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel , and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers , and was zealous toward God , as ye all are this day .
And I persecuted this way unto the death , binding and delivering into prisons both men and women .
As also the high priest doth bear me witness , and all the estate of the elders : from whom also I received letters unto the brethren , and went to Damascus , to bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem , for to be punished .
And it came to pass , that , as I made my journey , and was come nigh unto Damascus about noon , suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me .
And I fell unto the ground , and heard a voice saying unto me , Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ?
And I answered , Who art thou , Lord ? And he said unto me , I am Jesus of Nazareth , whom thou persecutest .
And they that were with me saw indeed the light , and were afraid ; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me .
And I said , What shall I do , Lord ? And the Lord said unto me , Arise , and go into Damascus ; and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do .
And when I could not see for the glory of that light , being led by the hand of them that were with me , I came into Damascus .
And one Ananias , a devout man according to the law , having a good report of all the Jews which dwelt there .
Came unto me , and stood , and said unto me , Brother Saul , receive thy sight . And the same hour I looked up upon him .
And he said , The God of our fathers hath chosen thee , that thou shouldest know his will , and see that Just One , and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth .
For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard .
And now why tarriest thou ? arise , and be baptized , and wash away thy sins , calling on the name of the Lord .
And it came to pass , that , when I was come again to Jerusalem , even while I prayed in the temple , I was in a trance .
And saw him saying unto me , Make haste , and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem : for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me .
And I said , Lord , they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee .
And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed , I also was standing by , and consenting unto his death , and kept the raiment of them that slew him .
And he said unto me , Depart : for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles .
And they gave him audience unto this word , and then lifted up their voices , and said , Away with such a fellow from the earth : for it is not fit that he should live .
And as they cried out , and cast off their clothes , and threw dust into the air .
The chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle , and bade that he should be examined by scourging ; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him .
And as they bound him with thongs , Paul said unto the centurion that stood by , Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman , and uncondemned ?
When the centurion heard that , he went and told the chief captain , saying , Take heed what thou doest : for this man is a Roman .
Then the chief captain came , and said unto him , Tell me , art thou a Roman ? He said , Yea .
And the chief captain answered , With a great sum obtained I this freedom . And Paul said , But I was free born .
Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him : and the chief captain also was afraid , after he knew that he was a Roman , and because he had bound him .
On the morrow , because he would have known the certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews , he loosed him from his bands , and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear , and brought Paul down , and set him before them .
And Paul , earnestly beholding the council , said , Men and brethren , I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day .
And the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the mouth .
Then said Paul unto him , God shall smite thee , thou whited wall : for sittest thou to judge me after the law , and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law ?
And they that stood by said , Revilest thou God ' s high priest ?
Then said Paul , I wist not , brethren , that he was the high priest : for it is written , Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people .
But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees , and the other Pharisees , he cried out in the council , Men and brethren , I am a Pharisee , the son of a Pharisee : of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question .
And when he had so said , there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees : and the multitude was divided .
For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection , neither angel , nor spirit : but the Pharisees confess both .
And there arose a great cry : and the scribes that were of the Pharisees ' part arose , and strove , saying , We find no evil in this man : but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him , let us not fight against God .
And when there arose a great dissension , the chief captain , fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them , commanded the soldiers to go down , and to take him by force from among them , and to bring him into the castle .
And the night following the Lord stood by him , and said , Be of good cheer , Paul : for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem , so must thou bear witness also at Rome .
And when it was day , certain of the Jews banded together , and bound themselves under a curse , saying that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul .
And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy .
And they came to the chief priests and elders , and said , We have bound ourselves under a great curse , that we will eat nothing until we have slain Paul .
Now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you to morrow , as though ye would enquire something more perfectly concerning him : and we , or ever he come near , are ready to kill him .
And when Paul ' s sister ' s son heard of their lying in wait , he went and entered into the castle , and told Paul .
Then Paul called one of the centurions unto him , and said , Bring this young man unto the chief captain : for he hath a certain thing to tell him .
So he took him , and brought him to the chief captain , and said , Paul the prisoner called me unto him , and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee , who hath something to say unto thee .
Then the chief captain took him by the hand , and went with him aside privately , and asked him , What is that thou hast to tell me ?
And he said , The Jews have agreed to desire thee that thou wouldest bring down Paul to morrow into the council , as though they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly .
But do not thou yield unto them : for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men , which have bound themselves with an oath , that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him : and now are they ready , looking for a promise from thee .
So the chief captain then let the young man depart , and charged him , See thou tell no man that thou hast shewed these things to me .
And he called unto him two centurions , saying , Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea , and horsemen threescore and ten , and spearmen two hundred , at the third hour of the night .
And provide them beasts , that they may set Paul on , and bring him safe unto Felix the governor .
And he wrote a letter after this manner .
Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix sendeth greeting .
This man was taken of the Jews , and should have been killed of them : then came I with an army , and rescued him , having understood that he was a Roman .
And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him , I brought him forth into their council .
Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law , but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds .
And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the man , I sent straightway to thee , and gave commandment to his accusers also to say before thee what they had against him . Farewell .
Then the soldiers , as it was commanded them , took Paul , and brought him by night to Antipatris .
On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him , and returned to the castle .
Who , when they came to Caesarea , and delivered the epistle to the governor , presented Paul also before him .
And when the governor had read the letter , he asked of what province he was . And when he understood that he was of Cilicia .
I will hear thee , said he , when thine accusers are also come . And he commanded him to be kept in Herod ' s judgment hall .
And after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the elders , and with a certain orator named Tertullus , who informed the governor against Paul .
And when he was called forth , Tertullus began to accuse him , saying , Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness , and that very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence .
We accept it always , and in all places , most noble Felix , with all thankfulness .
Notwithstanding , that I be not further tedious unto thee , I pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words .
For we have found this man a pestilent fellow , and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world , and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes .
Who also hath gone about to profane the temple : whom we took , and would have judged according to our law .
But the chief captain Lysias came upon us , and with great violence took him away out of our hands .
Commanding his accusers to come unto thee : by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of all these things , whereof we accuse him .
And the Jews also assented , saying that these things were so .
Then Paul , after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak , answered , Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation , I do the more cheerfully answer for myself .
Because that thou mayest understand , that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship .
And they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man , neither raising up the people , neither in the synagogues , nor in the city .
Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me .
But this I confess unto thee , that after the way which they call heresy , so worship I the God of my fathers , believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets .
And have hope toward God , which they themselves also allow , that there shall be a resurrection of the dead , both of the just and unjust .
And herein do I exercise myself , to have always a conscience void of offence toward God , and toward men .
Now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation , and offerings .
Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple , neither with multitude , nor with tumult .
Who ought to have been here before thee , and object , if they had ought against me .
Or else let these same here say , if they have found any evil doing in me , while I stood before the council .
Except it be for this one voice , that I cried standing among them , Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this day .
And when Felix heard these things , having more perfect knowledge of that way , he deferred them , and said , When Lysias the chief captain shall come down , I will know the uttermost of your matter .
And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul , and to let him have liberty , and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him .
And after certain days , when Felix came with his wife Drusilla , which was a Jewess , he sent for Paul , and heard him concerning the faith in Christ .
And as he reasoned of righteousness , temperance , and judgment to come , Felix trembled , and answered , Go thy way for this time ; when I have a convenient season , I will call for thee .
He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul , that he might loose him : wherefore he sent for him the oftener , and communed with him .
But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix ' room : and Felix , willing to shew the Jews a pleasure , left Paul bound .
Now when Festus was come into the province , after three days he ascended from Caesarea to Jerusalem .
Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul , and besought him .
And desired favour against him , that he would send for him to Jerusalem , laying wait in the way to kill him .
But Festus answered , that Paul should be kept at Caesarea , and that he himself would depart shortly thither .
Let them therefore , said he , which among you are able , go down with me , and accuse this man , if there be any wickedness in him .
And when he had tarried among them more than ten days , he went down unto Caesarea ; and the next day sitting on the judgment seat commanded Paul to be brought .
And when he was come , the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stood round about , and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul , which they could not prove .
While he answered for himself , Neither against the law of the Jews , neither against the temple , nor yet against Caesar , have I offended any thing at all .
But Festus , willing to do the Jews a pleasure , answered Paul , and said , Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem , and there be judged of these things before me ?
Then said Paul , I stand at Caesar ' s judgment seat , where I ought to be judged : to the Jews have I done no wrong , as thou very well knowest .
For if I be an offender , or have committed any thing worthy of death , I refuse not to die : but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me , no man may deliver me unto them . I appeal unto Caesar .
Then Festus , when he had conferred with the council , answered , Hast thou appealed unto Caesar ? unto Caesar shalt thou go .
And after certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Caesarea to salute Festus .
And when they had been there many days , Festus declared Paul ' s cause unto the king , saying , There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix .
About whom , when I was at Jerusalem , the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me , desiring to have judgment against him .
To whom I answered , It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die , before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face , and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him .
Therefore , when they were come hither , without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment seat , and commanded the man to be brought forth .
Against whom when the accusers stood up , they brought none accusation of such things as I supposed .
But had certain questions against him of their own superstition , and of one Jesus , which was dead , whom Paul affirmed to be alive .
And because I doubted of such manner of questions , I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem , and there be judged of these matters .
But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus , I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Caesar .
Then Agrippa said unto Festus , I would also hear the man myself . To morrow , said he , thou shalt hear him .
And on the morrow , when Agrippa was come , and Bernice , with great pomp , and was entered into the place of hearing , with the chief captains , and principal men of the city , at Festus ' commandment Paul was brought forth .
And Festus said , King Agrippa , and all men which are here present with us , ye see this man , about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me , both at Jerusalem , and also here , crying that he ought not to live any longer .
But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death , and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus , I have determined to send him .
Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord . Wherefore I have brought him forth before you , and specially before thee , O king Agrippa , that , after examination had , I might have somewhat to write .
For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner , and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him .
Then Agrippa said unto Paul , Thou art permitted to speak for thyself . Then Paul stretched forth the hand , and answered for himself .
I think myself happy , king Agrippa , because I shall answer for myself this day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews .
Especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews : wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently .
My manner of life from my youth , which was at the first among mine own nation at Jerusalem , know all the Jews .
Which knew me from the beginning , if they would testify , that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee .
And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers .
Unto which promise our twelve tribes , instantly serving God day and night , hope to come . For which hope ' s sake , king Agrippa , I am accused of the Jews .
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you , that God should raise the dead ?
I verily thought with myself , that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth .
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem : and many of the saints did I shut up in prison , having received authority from the chief priests ; and when they were put to death , I gave my voice against them .
And I punished them oft in every synagogue , and compelled them to blaspheme ; and being exceedingly mad against them , I persecuted them even unto strange cities .
Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests .
At midday , O king , I saw in the way a light from heaven , above the brightness of the sun , shining round about me and them which journeyed with me .
And when we were all fallen to the earth , I heard a voice speaking unto me , and saying in the Hebrew tongue , Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks .
And I said , Who art thou , Lord ? And he said , I am Jesus whom thou persecutest .
But rise , and stand upon thy feet : for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose , to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen , and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee .
Delivering thee from the people , and from the Gentiles , unto whom now I send thee .
To open their eyes , and to turn them from darkness to light , and from the power of Satan unto God , that they may receive forgiveness of sins , and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me .
Whereupon , O king Agrippa , I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision .
But shewed first unto them of Damascus , and at Jerusalem , and throughout all the coasts of Judaea , and then to the Gentiles , that they should repent and turn to God , and do works meet for repentance .
For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple , and went about to kill me .
Having therefore obtained help of God , I continue unto this day , witnessing both to small and great , saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come .
That Christ should suffer , and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead , and should shew light unto the people , and to the Gentiles .
And as he thus spake for himself , Festus said with a loud voice , Paul , thou art beside thyself ; much learning doth make thee mad .
But he said , I am not mad , most noble Festus ; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness .
For the king knoweth of these things , before whom also I speak freely : for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him ; for this thing was not done in a corner .
King Agrippa , believest thou the prophets ? I know that thou believest .
Then Agrippa said unto Paul , Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian .
And Paul said , I would to God , that not only thou , but also all that hear me this day , were both almost , and altogether such as I am , except these bonds .
And when he had thus spoken , the king rose up , and the governor , and Bernice , and they that sat with them .
And when they were gone aside , they talked between themselves , saying , This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds .
Then said Agrippa unto Festus , This man might have been set at liberty , if he had not appealed unto Caesar .
And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy , they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Julius , a centurion of Augustus ' band .
And entering into a ship of Adramyttium , we launched , meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia ; one Aristarchus , a Macedonian of Thessalonica , being with us .
And the next day we touched at Sidon . And Julius courteously entreated Paul , and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself .
And when we had launched from thence , we sailed under Cyprus , because the winds were contrary .
And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia , we came to Myra , a city of Lycia .
And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy ; and he put us therein .
And when we had sailed slowly many days , and scarce were come over against Cnidus , the wind not suffering us , we sailed under Crete , over against Salmone .
And , hardly passing it , came unto a place which is called The fair havens ; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea .
Now when much time was spent , and when sailing was now dangerous , because the fast was now already past , Paul admonished them .
And said unto them , Sirs , I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage , not only of the lading and ship , but also of our lives .
Nevertheless the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship , more than those things which were spoken by Paul .
And because the haven was not commodious to winter in , the more part advised to depart thence also , if by any means they might attain to Phenice , and there to winter ; which is an haven of Crete , and lieth toward the south west and north west .
And when the south wind blew softly , supposing that they had obtained their purpose , loosing thence , they sailed close by Crete .
But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind , called Euroclydon .
And when the ship was caught , and could not bear up into the wind , we let her drive .
And running under a certain island which is called Clauda , we had much work to come by the boat .
Which when they had taken up , they used helps , undergirding the ship ; and , fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands , strake sail , and so were driven .
And we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest , the next day they lightened the ship .
And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship .
And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared , and no small tempest lay on us , all hope that we should be saved was then taken away .
But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them , and said , Sirs , ye should have hearkened unto me , and not have loosed from Crete , and to have gained this harm and loss .
And now I exhort you to be of good cheer : for there shall be no loss of any man ' s life among you , but of the ship .
For there stood by me this night the angel of God , whose I am , and whom I serve .
Saying , Fear not , Paul ; thou must be brought before Caesar : and , lo , God hath given thee all them that sail with thee .
Wherefore , sirs , be of good cheer : for I believe God , that it shall be even as it was told me .
Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island .
But when the fourteenth night was come , as we were driven up and down in Adria , about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country .
And sounded , and found it twenty fathoms : and when they had gone a little further , they sounded again , and found it fifteen fathoms .
Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks , they cast four anchors out of the stern , and wished for the day .
And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship , when they had let down the boat into the sea , under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship .
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers , Except these abide in the ship , ye cannot be saved .
Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat , and let her fall off .
And while the day was coming on , Paul besought them all to take meat , saying , This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting , having taken nothing .
Wherefore I pray you to take some meat : for this is for your health : for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you .
And when he had thus spoken , he took bread , and gave thanks to God in presence of them all : and when he had broken it , he began to eat .
Then were they all of good cheer , and they also took some meat .
And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls .
And when they had eaten enough , they lightened the ship , and cast out the wheat into the sea .
And when it was day , they knew not the land : but they discovered a certain creek with a shore , into the which they were minded , if it were possible , to thrust in the ship .
And when they had taken up the anchors , they committed themselves unto the sea , and loosed the rudder bands , and hoised up the mainsail to the wind , and made toward shore .
And falling into a place where two seas met , they ran the ship aground ; and the forepart stuck fast , and remained unmoveable , but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves .
And the soldiers ' counsel was to kill the prisoners , lest any of them should swim out , and escape .
But the centurion , willing to save Paul , kept them from their purpose ; and commanded that they which could swim should cast themselves first into the sea , and get to land .
And the rest , some on boards , and some on broken pieces of the ship . And so it came to pass , that they escaped all safe to land .
And when they were escaped , then they knew that the island was called Melita .
And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness : for they kindled a fire , and received us every one , because of the present rain , and because of the cold .
And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks , and laid them on the fire , there came a viper out of the heat , and fastened on his hand .
And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand , they said among themselves , No doubt this man is a murderer , whom , though he hath escaped the sea , yet vengeance suffereth not to live .
And he shook off the beast into the fire , and felt no harm .
Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen , or fallen down dead suddenly : but after they had looked a great while , and saw no harm come to him , they changed their minds , and said that he was a god .
In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island , whose name was Publius ; who received us , and lodged us three days courteously .
And it came to pass , that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a bloody flux : to whom Paul entered in , and prayed , and laid his hands on him , and healed him .
So when this was done , others also , which had diseases in the island , came , and were healed .
Who also honoured us with many honours ; and when we departed , they laded us with such things as were necessary .
And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria , which had wintered in the isle , whose sign was Castor and Pollux .
And landing at Syracuse , we tarried there three days .
And from thence we fetched a compass , and came to Rhegium : and after one day the south wind blew , and we came the next day to Puteoli .
Where we found brethren , and were desired to tarry with them seven days : and so we went toward Rome .
And from thence , when the brethren heard of us , they came to meet us as far as Appii forum , and The three taverns : whom when Paul saw , he thanked God , and took courage .
And when we came to Rome , the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard : but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him .
And it came to pass , that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews together : and when they were come together , he said unto them , Men and brethren , though I have committed nothing against the people , or customs of our fathers , yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans .
Who , when they had examined me , would have let me go , because there was no cause of death in me .
But when the Jews spake against it , I was constrained to appeal unto Caesar ; not that I had ought to accuse my nation of .
For this cause therefore have I called for you , to see you , and to speak with you : because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain .
And they said unto him , We neither received letters out of Judaea concerning thee , neither any of the brethren that came shewed or spake any harm of thee .
But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest : for as concerning this sect , we know that every where it is spoken against .
And when they had appointed him a day , there came many to him into his lodging ; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God , persuading them concerning Jesus , both out of the law of Moses , and out of the prophets , from morning till evening .
And some believed the things which were spoken , and some believed not .
And when they agreed not among themselves , they departed , after that Paul had spoken one word , Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers .
Saying , Go unto this people , and say , Hearing ye shall hear , and shall not understand ; and seeing ye shall see , and not perceive .
For the heart of this people is waxed gross , and their ears are dull of hearing , and their eyes have they closed ; lest they should see with their eyes , and hear with their ears , and understand with their heart , and should be converted , and I should heal them .
Be it known therefore unto you , that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles , and that they will hear it .
And when he had said these words , the Jews departed , and had great reasoning among themselves .
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house , and received all that came in unto him .
Preaching the kingdom of God , and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ , with all confidence , no man forbidding him .
Paul , a servant of Jesus Christ , called to be an apostle , separated unto the gospel of God .
( Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures , )
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord , which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh .
And declared to be the Son of God with power , according to the spirit of holiness , by the resurrection from the dead .
By whom we have received grace and apostleship , for obedience to the faith among all nations , for his name .
Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ .
To all that be in Rome , beloved of God , called to be saints : Grace to you and peace from God our Father , and the Lord Jesus Christ .
First , I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all , that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world .
For God is my witness , whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son , that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers .
Making request , if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you .
For I long to see you , that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift , to the end ye may be established .
That is , that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me .
Now I would not have you ignorant , brethren , that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you , ( but was let hitherto , ) that I might have some fruit among you also , even as among other Gentiles .
I am debtor both to the Greeks , and to the Barbarians ; both to the wise , and to the unwise .
So , as much as in me is , I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also .
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ : for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth ; to the Jew first , and also to the Greek .
For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith : as it is written , The just shall live by faith .
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men , who hold the truth in unrighteousness .
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them ; for God hath shewed it unto them .
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen , being understood by the things that are made , even his eternal power and Godhead ; so that they are without excuse .
Because that , when they knew God , they glorified him not as God , neither were thankful ; but became vain in their imaginations , and their foolish heart was darkened .
Professing themselves to be wise , they became fools .
And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man , and to birds , and fourfooted beasts , and creeping things .
Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts , to dishonour their own bodies between themselves .
Who changed the truth of God into a lie , and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator , who is blessed for ever . Amen .
For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections : for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature .
And likewise also the men , leaving the natural use of the woman , burned in their lust one toward another ; men with men working that which is unseemly , and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet .
And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge , God gave them over to a reprobate mind , to do those things which are not convenient .
Being filled with all unrighteousness , fornication , wickedness , covetousness , maliciousness ; full of envy , murder , debate , deceit , malignity ; whisperers .
Backbiters , haters of God , despiteful , proud , boasters , inventors of evil things , disobedient to parents .
Without understanding , covenantbreakers , without natural affection , implacable , unmerciful .
Who knowing the judgment of God , that they which commit such things are worthy of death , not only do the same , but have pleasure in them that do them .
Therefore thou art inexcusable , O man , whosoever thou art that judgest : for wherein thou judgest another , thou condemnest thyself ; for thou that judgest doest the same things .
But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things .
And thinkest thou this , O man , that judgest them which do such things , and doest the same , that thou shalt escape the judgment of God ?
Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering ; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance ?
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God .
Who will render to every man according to his deeds .
To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality , eternal life .
But unto them that are contentious , and do not obey the truth , but obey unrighteousness , indignation and wrath .
Tribulation and anguish , upon every soul of man that doeth evil , of the Jew first , and also of the Gentile .
But glory , honour , and peace , to every man that worketh good , to the Jew first , and also to the Gentile .
For there is no respect of persons with God .
For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law : and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law .
( For not the hearers of the law are just before God , but the doers of the law shall be justified .
For when the Gentiles , which have not the law , do by nature the things contained in the law , these , having not the law , are a law unto themselves .
Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts , their conscience also bearing witness , and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another ; )
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel .
Behold , thou art called a Jew , and restest in the law , and makest thy boast of God .
And knowest his will , and approvest the things that are more excellent , being instructed out of the law .
And art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind , a light of them which are in darkness .
An instructor of the foolish , a teacher of babes , which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law .
Thou therefore which teachest another , teachest thou not thyself ? thou that preachest a man should not steal , dost thou steal ?
Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery , dost thou commit adultery ? thou that abhorrest idols , dost thou commit sacrilege ?
Thou that makest thy boast of the law , through breaking the law dishonourest thou God ?
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you , as it is written .
For circumcision verily profiteth , if thou keep the law : but if thou be a breaker of the law , thy circumcision is made uncircumcision .
Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law , shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision ?
And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature , if it fulfil the law , judge thee , who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law ?
For he is not a Jew , which is one outwardly ; neither is that circumcision , which is outward in the flesh .
But he is a Jew , which is one inwardly ; and circumcision is that of the heart , in the spirit , and not in the letter ; whose praise is not of men , but of God .
What advantage then hath the Jew ? or what profit is there of circumcision ?
Much every way : chiefly , because that unto them were committed the oracles of God .
For what if some did not believe ? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect ?
God forbid : yea , let God be true , but every man a liar ; as it is written , That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings , and mightest overcome when thou art judged .
But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God , what shall we say ? Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance ? ( I speak as a man )
God forbid : for then how shall God judge the world ?
For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory ; why yet am I also judged as a sinner ?
And not rather , ( as we be slanderously reported , and as some affirm that we say , ) Let us do evil , that good may come ? whose damnation is just .
What then ? are we better than they ? No , in no wise : for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles , that they are all under sin .
As it is written , There is none righteous , no , not one .
There is none that understandeth , there is none that seeketh after God .
They are all gone out of the way , they are together become unprofitable ; there is none that doeth good , no , not one .
Their throat is an open sepulchre ; with their tongues they have used deceit ; the poison of asps is under their lips .
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness .
Their feet are swift to shed blood .
Destruction and misery are in their ways .
And the way of peace have they not known .
There is no fear of God before their eyes .
Now we know that what things soever the law saith , it saith to them who are under the law : that every mouth may be stopped , and all the world may become guilty before God .
Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight : for by the law is the knowledge of sin .
But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested , being witnessed by the law and the prophets .
Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe : for there is no difference .
For all have sinned , and come short of the glory of God .
Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus .
Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood , to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past , through the forbearance of God .
To declare , I say , at this time his righteousness : that he might be just , and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus .
Where is boasting then ? It is excluded . By what law ? of works ? Nay : but by the law of faith .
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law .
Is he the God of the Jews only ? is he not also of the Gentiles ? Yes , of the Gentiles also .
Seeing it is one God , which shall justify the circumcision by faith , and uncircumcision through faith .
Do we then make void the law through faith ? God forbid : yea , we establish the law .
What shall we say then that Abraham our father , as pertaining to the flesh , hath found ?
For if Abraham were justified by works , he hath whereof to glory ; but not before God .
For what saith the scripture ? Abraham believed God , and it was counted unto him for righteousness .
Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace , but of debt .
But to him that worketh not , but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly , his faith is counted for righteousness .
Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man , unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works .
Saying , Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven , and whose sins are covered .
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin .
Cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only , or upon the uncircumcision also ? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness .
How was it then reckoned ? when he was in circumcision , or in uncircumcision ? Not in circumcision , but in uncircumcision .
And he received the sign of circumcision , a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised : that he might be the father of all them that believe , though they be not circumcised ; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also .
And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only , but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham , which he had being yet uncircumcised .
For the promise , that he should be the heir of the world , was not to Abraham , or to his seed , through the law , but through the righteousness of faith .
For if they which are of the law be heirs , faith is made void , and the promise made of none effect .
Because the law worketh wrath : for where no law is , there is no transgression .
Therefore it is of faith , that it might be by grace ; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed ; not to that only which is of the law , but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham ; who is the father of us all .
( As it is written , I have made thee a father of many nations , ) before him whom he believed , even God , who quickeneth the dead , and calleth those things which be not as though they were .
Who against hope believed in hope , that he might become the father of many nations , according to that which was spoken , So shall thy seed be .
And being not weak in faith , he considered not his own body now dead , when he was about an hundred years old , neither yet the deadness of Sara ' s womb .
He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief ; but was strong in faith , giving glory to God .
And being fully persuaded that , what he had promised , he was able also to perform .
And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness .
Now it was not written for his sake alone , that it was imputed to him .
But for us also , to whom it shall be imputed , if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead .
Who was delivered for our offences , and was raised again for our justification .
Therefore being justified by faith , we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ .
By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand , and rejoice in hope of the glory of God .
And not only so , but we glory in tribulations also : knowing that tribulation worketh patience .
And patience , experience ; and experience , hope .
And hope maketh not ashamed ; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us .
For when we were yet without strength , in due time Christ died for the ungodly .
For scarcely for a righteous man will one die : yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die .
But God commendeth his love toward us , in that , while we were yet sinners , Christ died for us .
Much more then , being now justified by his blood , we shall be saved from wrath through him .
For if , when we were enemies , we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son , much more , being reconciled , we shall be saved by his life .
And not only so , but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ , by whom we have now received the atonement .
Wherefore , as by one man sin entered into the world , and death by sin ; and so death passed upon all men , for that all have sinned .
( For until the law sin was in the world : but sin is not imputed when there is no law .
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses , even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam ' s transgression , who is the figure of him that was to come .
But not as the offence , so also is the free gift . For if through the offence of one many be dead , much more the grace of God , and the gift by grace , which is by one man , Jesus Christ , hath abounded unto many .
And not as it was by one that sinned , so is the gift : for the judgment was by one to condemnation , but the free gift is of many offences unto justification .
For if by one man ' s offence death reigned by one ; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one , Jesus Christ . )
Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation ; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life .
For as by one man ' s disobedience many were made sinners , so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous .
Moreover the law entered , that the offence might abound . But where sin abounded , grace did much more abound .
That as sin hath reigned unto death , even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord .
What shall we say then ? Shall we continue in sin , that grace may abound ?
God forbid . How shall we , that are dead to sin , live any longer therein ?
Know ye not , that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death ?
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death : that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father , even so we also should walk in newness of life .
For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death , we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection .
Knowing this , that our old man is crucified with him , that the body of sin might be destroyed , that henceforth we should not serve sin .
For he that is dead is freed from sin .
Now if we be dead with Christ , we believe that we shall also live with him .
Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more ; death hath no more dominion over him .
For in that he died , he died unto sin once : but in that he liveth , he liveth unto God .
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin , but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord .
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body , that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof .
Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin : but yield yourselves unto God , as those that are alive from the dead , and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God .
For sin shall not have dominion over you : for ye are not under the law , but under grace .
What then ? shall we sin , because we are not under the law , but under grace ? God forbid .
Know ye not , that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey , his servants ye are to whom ye obey ; whether of sin unto death , or of obedience unto righteousness ?
But God be thanked , that ye were the servants of sin , but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you .
Being then made free from sin , ye became the servants of righteousness .
I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your flesh : for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity ; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness .
For when ye were the servants of sin , ye were free from righteousness .
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed ? for the end of those things is death .
But now being made free from sin , and become servants to God , ye have your fruit unto holiness , and the end everlasting life .
For the wages of sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord .
Know ye not , brethren , ( for I speak to them that know the law , ) how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth ?
For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband so long as he liveth ; but if the husband be dead , she is loosed from the law of her husband .
So then if , while her husband liveth , she be married to another man , she shall be called an adulteress : but if her husband be dead , she is free from that law ; so that she is no adulteress , though she be married to another man .
Wherefore , my brethren , ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ ; that ye should be married to another , even to him who is raised from the dead , that we should bring forth fruit unto God .
For when we were in the flesh , the motions of sins , which were by the law , did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death .
But now we are delivered from the law , that being dead wherein we were held ; that we should serve in newness of spirit , and not in the oldness of the letter .
What shall we say then ? Is the law sin ? God forbid . Nay , I had not known sin , but by the law : for I had not known lust , except the law had said , Thou shalt not covet .
But sin , taking occasion by the commandment , wrought in me all manner of concupiscence . For without the law sin was dead .
For I was alive without the law once : but when the commandment came , sin revived , and I died .
And the commandment , which was ordained to life , I found to be unto death .
For sin , taking occasion by the commandment , deceived me , and by it slew me .
Wherefore the law is holy , and the commandment holy , and just , and good .
Was then that which is good made death unto me ? God forbid . But sin , that it might appear sin , working death in me by that which is good ; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful .
For we know that the law is spiritual : but I am carnal , sold under sin .
For that which I do I allow not : for what I would , that do I not ; but what I hate , that do I .
If then I do that which I would not , I consent unto the law that it is good .
Now then it is no more I that do it , but sin that dwelleth in me .
For I know that in me ( that is , in my flesh , ) dwelleth no good thing : for to will is present with me ; but how to perform that which is good I find not .
For the good that I would I do not : but the evil which I would not , that I do .
Now if I do that I would not , it is no more I that do it , but sin that dwelleth in me .
I find then a law , that , when I would do good , evil is present with me .
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man .
But I see another law in my members , warring against the law of my mind , and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members .
O wretched man that I am ! who shall deliver me from the body of this death ?
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord . So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God ; but with the flesh the law of sin .
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus , who walk not after the flesh , but after the Spirit .
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death .
For what the law could not do , in that it was weak through the flesh , God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh , and for sin , condemned sin in the flesh .
That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us , who walk not after the flesh , but after the Spirit .
For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh ; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit .
For to be carnally minded is death ; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace .
Because the carnal mind is enmity against God : for it is not subject to the law of God , neither indeed can be .
So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God .
But ye are not in the flesh , but in the Spirit , if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you . Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ , he is none of his .
And if Christ be in you , the body is dead because of sin ; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness .
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you , he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you .
Therefore , brethren , we are debtors , not to the flesh , to live after the flesh .
For if ye live after the flesh , ye shall die : but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body , ye shall live .
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God , they are the sons of God .
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear ; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption , whereby we cry , Abba , Father .
The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit , that we are the children of God .
And if children , then heirs ; heirs of God , and joint - heirs with Christ ; if so be that we suffer with him , that we may be also glorified together .
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us .
For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God .
For the creature was made subject to vanity , not willingly , but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope .
Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God .
For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now .
And not only they , but ourselves also , which have the firstfruits of the Spirit , even we ourselves groan within ourselves , waiting for the adoption , to wit , the redemption of our body .
For we are saved by hope : but hope that is seen is not hope : for what a man seeth , why doth he yet hope for ?
But if we hope for that we see not , then do we with patience wait for it .
Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities : for we know not what we should pray for as we ought : but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered .
And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit , because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God .
And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God , to them who are the called according to his purpose .
For whom he did foreknow , he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son , that he might be the firstborn among many brethren .
Moreover whom he did predestinate , them he also called : and whom he called , them he also justified : and whom he justified , them he also glorified .
What shall we then say to these things ? If God be for us , who can be against us ?
He that spared not his own Son , but delivered him up for us all , how shall he not with him also freely give us all things ?
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God ' s elect ? It is God that justifieth .
Who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ that died , yea rather , that is risen again , who is even at the right hand of God , who also maketh intercession for us .
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ ? shall tribulation , or distress , or persecution , or famine , or nakedness , or peril , or sword ?
As it is written , For thy sake we are killed all the day long ; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter .
Nay , in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us .
For I am persuaded , that neither death , nor life , nor angels , nor principalities , nor powers , nor things present , nor things to come .
Nor height , nor depth , nor any other creature , shall be able to separate us from the love of God , which is in Christ Jesus our Lord .
I say the truth in Christ , I lie not , my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost .
That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart .
For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren , my kinsmen according to the flesh .
Who are Israelites ; to whom pertaineth the adoption , and the glory , and the covenants , and the giving of the law , and the service of God , and the promises .
Whose are the fathers , and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came , who is over all , God blessed for ever . Amen .
Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect . For they are not all Israel , which are of Israel .
Neither , because they are the seed of Abraham , are they all children : but , In Isaac shall thy seed be called .
That is , They which are the children of the flesh , these are not the children of God : but the children of the promise are counted for the seed .
For this is the word of promise , At this time will I come , and Sara shall have a son .
And not only this ; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one , even by our father Isaac .
( For the children being not yet born , neither having done any good or evil , that the purpose of God according to election might stand , not of works , but of him that calleth ; )
It was said unto her , The elder shall serve the younger .
As it is written , Jacob have I loved , but Esau have I hated .
What shall we say then ? Is there unrighteousness with God ? God forbid .
For he saith to Moses , I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy , and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion .
So then it is not of him that willeth , nor of him that runneth , but of God that sheweth mercy .
For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh , Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up , that I might shew my power in thee , and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth .
Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy , and whom he will he hardeneth .
Thou wilt say then unto me , Why doth he yet find fault ? For who hath resisted his will ?
Nay but , O man , who art thou that repliest against God ? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it , Why hast thou made me thus ?
Hath not the potter power over the clay , of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour , and another unto dishonour ?
What if God , willing to shew his wrath , and to make his power known , endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction .
And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy , which he had afore prepared unto glory .
Even us , whom he hath called , not of the Jews only , but also of the Gentiles ?
As he saith also in Osee , I will call them my people , which were not my people ; and her beloved , which was not beloved .
And it shall come to pass , that in the place where it was said unto them , Ye are not my people ; there shall they be called the children of the living God .
Esaias also crieth concerning Israel , Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea , a remnant shall be saved .
For he will finish the work , and cut it short in righteousness : because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth .
And as Esaias said before , Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed , we had been as Sodoma , and been made like unto Gomorrha .
What shall we say then ? That the Gentiles , which followed not after righteousness , have attained to righteousness , even the righteousness which is of faith .
But Israel , which followed after the law of righteousness , hath not attained to the law of righteousness .
Wherefore ? Because they sought it not by faith , but as it were by the works of the law . For they stumbled at that stumblingstone .
As it is written , Behold , I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence : and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed .
Brethren , my heart ' s desire and prayer to God for Israel is , that they might be saved .
For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God , but not according to knowledge .
For they being ignorant of God ' s righteousness , and going about to establish their own righteousness , have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God .
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth .
For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law , That the man which doeth those things shall live by them .
But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise , Say not in thine heart , Who shall ascend into heaven ? ( that is , to bring Christ down from above : )
Or , Who shall descend into the deep ? ( that is , to bring up Christ again from the dead . )
But what saith it ? The word is nigh thee , even in thy mouth , and in thy heart : that is , the word of faith , which we preach .
That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus , and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead , thou shalt be saved .
For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness ; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation .
For the scripture saith , Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed .
For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek : for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him .
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved .
How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed ? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard ? and how shall they hear without a preacher ?
And how shall they preach , except they be sent ? as it is written , How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace , and bring glad tidings of good things !
But they have not all obeyed the gospel . For Esaias saith , Lord , who hath believed our report ?
So then faith cometh by hearing , and hearing by the word of God .
But I say , Have they not heard ? Yes verily , their sound went into all the earth , and their words unto the ends of the world .
But I say , Did not Israel know ? First Moses saith , I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people , and by a foolish nation I will anger you .
But Esaias is very bold , and saith , I was found of them that sought me not ; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me .
But to Israel he saith , All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people .
I say then , Hath God cast away his people ? God forbid . For I also am an Israelite , of the seed of Abraham , of the tribe of Benjamin .
God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew . Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias ? how he maketh intercession to God against Israel , saying .
Lord , they have killed thy prophets , and digged down thine altars ; and I am left alone , and they seek my life .
But what saith the answer of God unto him ? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men , who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal .
Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace .
And if by grace , then is it no more of works : otherwise grace is no more grace . But if it be of works , then is it no more grace : otherwise work is no more work .
What then ? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for ; but the election hath obtained it , and the rest were blinded
( According as it is written , God hath given them the spirit of slumber , eyes that they should not see , and ears that they should not hear ; ) unto this day .
And David saith , Let their table be made a snare , and a trap , and a stumblingblock , and a recompence unto them .
Let their eyes be darkened , that they may not see , and bow down their back alway .
I say then , Have they stumbled that they should fall ? God forbid : but rather through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles , for to provoke them to jealousy .
Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world , and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles ; how much more their fulness ?
For I speak to you Gentiles , inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles , I magnify mine office .
If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh , and might save some of them .
For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world , what shall the receiving of them be , but life from the dead ?
For if the firstfruit be holy , the lump is also holy : and if the root be holy , so are the branches .
And if some of the branches be broken off , and thou , being a wild olive tree , wert graffed in among them , and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree .
Boast not against the branches . But if thou boast , thou bearest not the root , but the root thee .
Thou wilt say then , The branches were broken off , that I might be graffed in .
Well ; because of unbelief they were broken off , and thou standest by faith . Be not highminded , but fear .
For if God spared not the natural branches , take heed lest he also spare not thee .
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God : on them which fell , severity ; but toward thee , goodness , if thou continue in his goodness : otherwise thou also shalt be cut off .
And they also , if they abide not still in unbelief , shall be graffed in : for God is able to graff them in again .
For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature , and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree : how much more shall these , which be the natural branches , be graffed into their own olive tree ?
For I would not , brethren , that ye should be ignorant of this mystery , lest ye should be wise in your own conceits ; that blindness in part is happened to Israel , until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in .
And so all Israel shall be saved : as it is written , There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer , and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob .
For this is my covenant unto them , when I shall take away their sins .
As concerning the gospel , they are enemies for your sakes : but as touching the election , they are beloved for the fathers ' sakes .
For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance .
For as ye in times past have not believed God , yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief .
Even so have these also now not believed , that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy .
For God hath concluded them all in unbelief , that he might have mercy upon all .
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God ! how unsearchable are his judgments , and his ways past finding out !
For who hath known the mind of the Lord ? or who hath been his counsellor ?
Or who hath first given to him , and it shall be recompensed unto him again ?
For of him , and through him , and to him , are all things : to whom be glory for ever . Amen .
I beseech you therefore , brethren , by the mercies of God , that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice , holy , acceptable unto God , which is your reasonable service .
And be not conformed to this world : but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind , that ye may prove what is that good , and acceptable , and perfect , will of God .
For I say , through the grace given unto me , to every man that is among you , not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think ; but to think soberly , according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith .
For as we have many members in one body , and all members have not the same office .
So we , being many , are one body in Christ , and every one members one of another .
Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us , whether prophecy , let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith .
Or ministry , let us wait on our ministering : or he that teacheth , on teaching .
Or he that exhorteth , on exhortation : he that giveth , let him do it with simplicity ; he that ruleth , with diligence ; he that sheweth mercy , with cheerfulness .
Let love be without dissimulation . Abhor that which is evil ; cleave to that which is good .
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love ; in honour preferring one another .
Not slothful in business ; fervent in spirit ; serving the Lord .
Rejoicing in hope ; patient in tribulation ; continuing instant in prayer .
Distributing to the necessity of saints ; given to hospitality .
Bless them which persecute you : bless , and curse not .
Rejoice with them that do rejoice , and weep with them that weep .
Be of the same mind one toward another . Mind not high things , but condescend to men of low estate . Be not wise in your own conceits .
Recompense to no man evil for evil . Provide things honest in the sight of all men .
If it be possible , as much as lieth in you , live peaceably with all men .
Dearly beloved , avenge not yourselves , but rather give place unto wrath : for it is written , Vengeance is mine ; I will repay , saith the Lord .
Therefore if thine enemy hunger , feed him ; if he thirst , give him drink : for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head .
Be not overcome of evil , but overcome evil with good .
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers . For there is no power but of God : the powers that be are ordained of God .
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power , resisteth the ordinance of God : and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation .
For rulers are not a terror to good works , but to the evil . Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power ? do that which is good , and thou shalt have praise of the same .
For he is the minister of God to thee for good . But if thou do that which is evil , be afraid ; for he beareth not the sword in vain : for he is the minister of God , a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil .
Wherefore ye must needs be subject , not only for wrath , but also for conscience sake .
For for this cause pay ye tribute also : for they are God ' s ministers , attending continually upon this very thing .
Render therefore to all their dues : tribute to whom tribute is due ; custom to whom custom ; fear to whom fear ; honour to whom honour .
Owe no man any thing , but to love one another : for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law .
For this , Thou shalt not commit adultery , Thou shalt not kill , Thou shalt not steal , Thou shalt not bear false witness , Thou shalt not covet ; and if there be any other commandment , it is briefly comprehended in this saying , namely , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself .
Love worketh no ill to his neighbour : therefore love is the fulfilling of the law .
And that , knowing the time , that now it is high time to awake out of sleep : for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed .
The night is far spent , the day is at hand : let us therefore cast off the works of darkness , and let us put on the armour of light .
Let us walk honestly , as in the day ; not in rioting and drunkenness , not in chambering and wantonness , not in strife and envying .
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ , and make not provision for the flesh , to fulfil the lusts thereof .
Him that is weak in the faith receive ye , but not to doubtful disputations .
For one believeth that he may eat all things : another , who is weak , eateth herbs .
Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not ; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth : for God hath received him .
Who art thou that judgest another man ' s servant ? to his own master he standeth or falleth . Yea , he shall be holden up : for God is able to make him stand .
One man esteemeth one day above another : another esteemeth every day alike . Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind .
He that regardeth the day , regardeth it unto the Lord ; and he that regardeth not the day , to the Lord he doth not regard it . He that eateth , eateth to the Lord , for he giveth God thanks ; and he that eateth not , to the Lord he eateth not , and giveth God thanks .
For none of us liveth to himself , and no man dieth to himself .
For whether we live , we live unto the Lord ; and whether we die , we die unto the Lord : whether we live therefore , or die , we are the Lord ' s .
For to this end Christ both died , and rose , and revived , that he might be Lord both of the dead and living .
But why dost thou judge thy brother ? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother ? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ .
For it is written , As I live , saith the Lord , every knee shall bow to me , and every tongue shall confess to God .
So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God .
Let us not therefore judge one another any more : but judge this rather , that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his brother ' s way .
I know , and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus , that there is nothing unclean of itself : but to him that esteemeth any thing to be unclean , to him it is unclean .
But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat , now walkest thou not charitably . Destroy not him with thy meat , for whom Christ died .
Let not then your good be evil spoken of .
For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink ; but righteousness , and peace , and joy in the Holy Ghost .
For he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God , and approved of men .
Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace , and things wherewith one may edify another .
For meat destroy not the work of God . All things indeed are pure ; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence .
It is good neither to eat flesh , nor to drink wine , nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth , or is offended , or is made weak .
Hast thou faith ? have it to thyself before God . Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth .
And he that doubteth is damned if he eat , because he eateth not of faith : for whatsoever is not of faith is sin .
We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak , and not to please ourselves .
Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification .
For even Christ pleased not himself ; but , as it is written , The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me .
For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning , that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope .
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus .
That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God , even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Wherefore receive ye one another , as Christ also received us to the glory of God .
Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God , to confirm the promises made unto the fathers .
And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy ; as it is written , For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles , and sing unto thy name .
And again he saith , Rejoice , ye Gentiles , with his people .
And again , Praise the Lord , all ye Gentiles ; and laud him , all ye people .
And again , Esaias saith , There shall be a root of Jesse , and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles ; in him shall the Gentiles trust .
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing , that ye may abound in hope , through the power of the Holy Ghost .
And I myself also am persuaded of you , my brethren , that ye also are full of goodness , filled with all knowledge , able also to admonish one another .
Nevertheless , brethren , I have written the more boldly unto you in some sort , as putting you in mind , because of the grace that is given to me of God .
That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles , ministering the gospel of God , that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable , being sanctified by the Holy Ghost .
I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God .
For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me , to make the Gentiles obedient , by word and deed .
Through mighty signs and wonders , by the power of the Spirit of God ; so that from Jerusalem , and round about unto Illyricum , I have fully preached the gospel of Christ .
Yea , so have I strived to preach the gospel , not where Christ was named , lest I should build upon another man ' s foundation .
But as it is written , To whom he was not spoken of , they shall see : and they that have not heard shall understand .
For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you .
But now having no more place in these parts , and having a great desire these many years to come unto you .
Whensoever I take my journey into Spain , I will come to you : for I trust to see you in my journey , and to be brought on my way thitherward by you , if first I be somewhat filled with your company .
But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints .
For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem .
It hath pleased them verily ; and their debtors they are . For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things , their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things .
When therefore I have performed this , and have sealed to them this fruit , I will come by you into Spain .
And I am sure that , when I come unto you , I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ .
Now I beseech you , brethren , for the Lord Jesus Christ ' s sake , and for the love of the Spirit , that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me .
That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judaea ; and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints .
That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God , and may with you be refreshed .
Now the God of peace be with you all . Amen .
I commend unto you Phebe our sister , which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea .
That ye receive her in the Lord , as becometh saints , and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you : for she hath been a succourer of many , and of myself also .
Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus .
Who have for my life laid down their own necks : unto whom not only I give thanks , but also all the churches of the Gentiles .
Likewise greet the church that is in their house . Salute my wellbeloved Epaenetus , who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ .
Greet Mary , who bestowed much labour on us .
Salute Andronicus and Junia , my kinsmen , and my fellowprisoners , who are of note among the apostles , who also were in Christ before me .
Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord .
Salute Urbane , our helper in Christ , and Stachys my beloved .
Salute Apelles approved in Christ . Salute them which are of Aristobulus ' household .
Salute Herodion my kinsman . Greet them that be of the household of Narcissus , which are in the Lord .
Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa , who labour in the Lord . Salute the beloved Persis , which laboured much in the Lord .
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord , and his mother and mine .
Salute Asyncritus , Phlegon , Hermas , Patrobas , Hermes , and the brethren which are with them .
Salute Philologus , and Julia , Nereus , and his sister , and Olympas , and all the saints which are with them .
Salute one another with an holy kiss . The churches of Christ salute you .
Now I beseech you , brethren , mark them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned ; and avoid them .
For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ , but their own belly ; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple .
For your obedience is come abroad unto all men . I am glad therefore on your behalf : but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good , and simple concerning evil .
And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly . The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . Amen .
Timotheus my workfellow , and Lucius , and Jason , and Sosipater , my kinsmen , salute you .
I Tertius , who wrote this epistle , salute you in the Lord .
Gaius mine host , and of the whole church , saluteth you . Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you , and Quartus a brother .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all . Amen .
Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel , and the preaching of Jesus Christ , according to the revelation of the mystery , which was kept secret since the world began .
But now is made manifest , and by the scriptures of the prophets , according to the commandment of the everlasting God , made known to all nations for the obedience of faith .
To God only wise , be glory through Jesus Christ for ever . Amen .
Paul , called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God , and Sosthenes our brother .
Unto the church of God which is at Corinth , to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus , called to be saints , with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord , both theirs and ours .
Grace be unto you , and peace , from God our Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ .
I thank my God always on your behalf , for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ .
That in every thing ye are enriched by him , in all utterance , and in all knowledge .
Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you .
So that ye come behind in no gift ; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Who shall also confirm you unto the end , that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ .
God is faithful , by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord .
Now I beseech you , brethren , by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that ye all speak the same thing , and that there be no divisions among you ; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment .
For it hath been declared unto me of you , my brethren , by them which are of the house of Chloe , that there are contentions among you .
Now this I say , that every one of you saith , I am of Paul ; and I of Apollos ; and I of Cephas ; and I of Christ .
Is Christ divided ? was Paul crucified for you ? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul ?
I thank God that I baptized none of you , but Crispus and Gaius .
Lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name .
And I baptized also the household of Stephanas : besides , I know not whether I baptized any other .
For Christ sent me not to baptize , but to preach the gospel : not with wisdom of words , lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect .
For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness ; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God .
For it is written , I will destroy the wisdom of the wise , and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent .
Where is the wise ? where is the scribe ? where is the disputer of this world ? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world ?
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God , it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe .
For the Jews require a sign , and the Greeks seek after wisdom .
But we preach Christ crucified , unto the Jews a stumblingblock , and unto the Greeks foolishness .
But unto them which are called , both Jews and Greeks , Christ the power of God , and the wisdom of God .
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men ; and the weakness of God is stronger than men .
For ye see your calling , brethren , how that not many wise men after the flesh , not many mighty , not many noble , are called .
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise ; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty .
And base things of the world , and things which are despised , hath God chosen , yea , and things which are not , to bring to nought things that are .
That no flesh should glory in his presence .
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus , who of God is made unto us wisdom , and righteousness , and sanctification , and redemption .
That , according as it is written , He that glorieth , let him glory in the Lord .
And I , brethren , when I came to you , came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom , declaring unto you the testimony of God .
For I determined not to know any thing among you , save Jesus Christ , and him crucified .
And I was with you in weakness , and in fear , and in much trembling .
And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man ' s wisdom , but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power .
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men , but in the power of God .
Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect : yet not the wisdom of this world , nor of the princes of this world , that come to nought .
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery , even the hidden wisdom , which God ordained before the world unto our glory .
Which none of the princes of this world knew : for had they known it , they would not have crucified the Lord of glory .
But as it is written , Eye hath not seen , nor ear heard , neither have entered into the heart of man , the things which God hath prepared for them that love him .
But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit : for the Spirit searcheth all things , yea , the deep things of God .
For what man knoweth the things of a man , save the spirit of man which is in him ? even so the things of God knoweth no man , but the Spirit of God .
Now we have received , not the spirit of the world , but the spirit which is of God ; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God .
Which things also we speak , not in the words which man ' s wisdom teacheth , but which the Holy Ghost teacheth ; comparing spiritual things with spiritual .
But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God : for they are foolishness unto him : neither can he know them , because they are spiritually discerned .
But he that is spiritual judgeth all things , yet he himself is judged of no man .
For who hath known the mind of the Lord , that he may instruct him ? But we have the mind of Christ .
And I , brethren , could not speak unto you as unto spiritual , but as unto carnal , even as unto babes in Christ .
I have fed you with milk , and not with meat : for hitherto ye were not able to bear it , neither yet now are ye able .
For ye are yet carnal : for whereas there is among you envying , and strife , and divisions , are ye not carnal , and walk as men ?
For while one saith , I am of Paul ; and another , I am of Apollos ; are ye not carnal ?
Who then is Paul , and who is Apollos , but ministers by whom ye believed , even as the Lord gave to every man ?
I have planted , Apollos watered ; but God gave the increase .
So then neither is he that planteth any thing , neither he that watereth ; but God that giveth the increase .
Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one : and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour .
For we are labourers together with God : ye are God ' s husbandry , ye are God ' s building .
According to the grace of God which is given unto me , as a wise masterbuilder , I have laid the foundation , and another buildeth thereon . But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon .
For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid , which is Jesus Christ .
Now if any man build upon this foundation gold , silver , precious stones , wood , hay , stubble .
Every man ' s work shall be made manifest : for the day shall declare it , because it shall be revealed by fire ; and the fire shall try every man ' s work of what sort it is .
If any man ' s work abide which he hath built thereupon , he shall receive a reward .
If any man ' s work shall be burned , he shall suffer loss : but he himself shall be saved ; yet so as by fire .
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God , and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ?
If any man defile the temple of God , him shall God destroy ; for the temple of God is holy , which temple ye are .
Let no man deceive himself . If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world , let him become a fool , that he may be wise .
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God . For it is written , He taketh the wise in their own craftiness .
And again , The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise , that they are vain .
Therefore let no man glory in men . For all things are yours .
Whether Paul , or Apollos , or Cephas , or the world , or life , or death , or things present , or things to come ; all are yours .
And ye are Christ ' s ; and Christ is God ' s .
Let a man so account of us , as of the ministers of Christ , and stewards of the mysteries of God .
Moreover it is required in stewards , that a man be found faithful .
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you , or of man ' s judgment : yea , I judge not mine own self .
For I know nothing by myself ; yet am I not hereby justified : but he that judgeth me is the Lord .
Therefore judge nothing before the time , until the Lord come , who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness , and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts : and then shall every man have praise of God .
And these things , brethren , I have in a figure transferred to myself and to Apollos for your sakes ; that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written , that no one of you be puffed up for one against another .
For who maketh thee to differ from another ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive ? now if thou didst receive it , why dost thou glory , as if thou hadst not received it ?
Now ye are full , now ye are rich , ye have reigned as kings without us : and I would to God ye did reign , that we also might reign with you .
For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last , as it were appointed to death : for we are made a spectacle unto the world , and to angels , and to men .
We are fools for Christ ' s sake , but ye are wise in Christ ; we are weak , but ye are strong ; ye are honourable , but we are despised .
Even unto this present hour we both hunger , and thirst , and are naked , and are buffeted , and have no certain dwellingplace .
And labour , working with our own hands : being reviled , we bless ; being persecuted , we suffer it .
Being defamed , we intreat : we are made as the filth of the world , and are the offscouring of all things unto this day .
I write not these things to shame you , but as my beloved sons I warn you .
For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ , yet have ye not many fathers : for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel .
Wherefore I beseech you , be ye followers of me .
For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus , who is my beloved son , and faithful in the Lord , who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ , as I teach every where in every church .
Now some are puffed up , as though I would not come to you .
But I will come to you shortly , if the Lord will , and will know , not the speech of them which are puffed up , but the power .
For the kingdom of God is not in word , but in power .
What will ye ? shall I come unto you with a rod , or in love , and in the spirit of meekness ?
It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you , and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles , that one should have his father ' s wife .
And ye are puffed up , and have not rather mourned , that he that hath done this deed might be taken away from among you .
For I verily , as absent in body , but present in spirit , have judged already , as though I were present , concerning him that hath so done this deed .
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , when ye are gathered together , and my spirit , with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ .
To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh , that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus .
Your glorying is not good . Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump ?
Purge out therefore the old leaven , that ye may be a new lump , as ye are unleavened . For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us .
Therefore let us keep the feast , not with old leaven , neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness ; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth .
I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators .
Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world , or with the covetous , or extortioners , or with idolaters ; for then must ye needs go out of the world .
But now I have written unto you not to keep company , if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator , or covetous , or an idolater , or a railer , or a drunkard , or an extortioner ; with such an one no not to eat .
For what have I to do to judge them also that are without ? do not ye judge them that are within ?
But them that are without God judgeth . Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person .
Dare any of you , having a matter against another , go to law before the unjust , and not before the saints ?
Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world ? and if the world shall be judged by you , are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters ?
Know ye not that we shall judge angels ? how much more things that pertain to this life ?
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life , set them to judge who are least esteemed in the church .
I speak to your shame . Is it so , that there is not a wise man among you ? no , not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren ?
But brother goeth to law with brother , and that before the unbelievers .
Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you , because ye go to law one with another . Why do ye not rather take wrong ? why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded ?
Nay , ye do wrong , and defraud , and that your brethren .
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God ? Be not deceived : neither fornicators , nor idolaters , nor adulterers , nor effeminate , nor abusers of themselves with mankind .
Nor thieves , nor covetous , nor drunkards , nor revilers , nor extortioners , shall inherit the kingdom of God .
And such were some of you : but ye are washed , but ye are sanctified , but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus , and by the Spirit of our God .
All things are lawful unto me , but all things are not expedient : all things are lawful for me , but I will not be brought under the power of any .
Meats for the belly , and the belly for meats : but God shall destroy both it and them . Now the body is not for fornication , but for the Lord ; and the Lord for the body .
And God hath both raised up the Lord , and will also raise up us by his own power .
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ ? shall I then take the members of Christ , and make them the members of an harlot ? God forbid .
What ? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body ? for two , saith he , shall be one flesh .
But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit .
Flee fornication . Every sin that a man doeth is without the body ; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body .
What ? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you , which ye have of God , and ye are not your own ?
For ye are bought with a price : therefore glorify God in your body , and in your spirit , which are God ' s .
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me : It is good for a man not to touch a woman .
Nevertheless , to avoid fornication , let every man have his own wife , and let every woman have her own husband .
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence : and likewise also the wife unto the husband .
The wife hath not power of her own body , but the husband : and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body , but the wife .
Defraud ye not one the other , except it be with consent for a time , that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer ; and come together again , that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency .
But I speak this by permission , and not of commandment .
For I would that all men were even as I myself . But every man hath his proper gift of God , one after this manner , and another after that .
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows , It is good for them if they abide even as I .
But if they cannot contain , let them marry : for it is better to marry than to burn .
And unto the married I command , yet not I , but the Lord , Let not the wife depart from her husband .
But and if she depart , let her remain unmarried , or be reconciled to her husband : and let not the husband put away his wife .
But to the rest speak I , not the Lord : If any brother hath a wife that believeth not , and she be pleased to dwell with him , let him not put her away .
And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not , and if he be pleased to dwell with her , let her not leave him .
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife , and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband : else were your children unclean ; but now are they holy .
But if the unbelieving depart , let him depart . A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases : but God hath called us to peace .
For what knowest thou , O wife , whether thou shalt save thy husband ? or how knowest thou , O man , whether thou shalt save thy wife ?
But as God hath distributed to every man , as the Lord hath called every one , so let him walk . And so ordain I in all churches .
Is any man called being circumcised ? let him not become uncircumcised . Is any called in uncircumcision ? let him not be circumcised .
Circumcision is nothing , and uncircumcision is nothing , but the keeping of the commandments of God .
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called .
Art thou called being a servant ? care not for it : but if thou mayest be made free , use it rather .
For he that is called in the Lord , being a servant , is the Lord ' s freeman : likewise also he that is called , being free , is Christ ' s servant .
Ye are bought with a price ; be not ye the servants of men .
Brethren , let every man , wherein he is called , therein abide with God .
Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord : yet I give my judgment , as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful .
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress , I say , that it is good for a man so to be .
Art thou bound unto a wife ? seek not to be loosed . Art thou loosed from a wife ? seek not a wife .
But and if thou marry , thou hast not sinned ; and if a virgin marry , she hath not sinned . Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh : but I spare you .
But this I say , brethren , the time is short : it remaineth , that both they that have wives be as though they had none .
And they that weep , as though they wept not ; and they that rejoice , as though they rejoiced not ; and they that buy , as though they possessed not .
And they that use this world , as not abusing it : for the fashion of this world passeth away .
But I would have you without carefulness . He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord , how he may please the Lord .
But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world , how he may please his wife .
There is difference also between a wife and a virgin . The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord , that she may be holy both in body and in spirit : but she that is married careth for the things of the world , how she may please her husband .
And this I speak for your own profit ; not that I may cast a snare upon you , but for that which is comely , and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction .
But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin , if she pass the flower of her age , and need so require , let him do what he will , he sinneth not : let them marry .
Nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart , having no necessity , but hath power over his own will , and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin , doeth well .
So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well ; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better .
The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth ; but if her husband be dead , she is at liberty to be married to whom she will ; only in the Lord .
But she is happier if she so abide , after my judgment : and I think also that I have the Spirit of God .
Now as touching things offered unto idols , we know that we all have knowledge . Knowledge puffeth up , but charity edifieth .
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing , he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know .
But if any man love God , the same is known of him .
As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols , we know that an idol is nothing in the world , and that there is none other God but one .
For though there be that are called gods , whether in heaven or in earth , ( as there be gods many , and lords many , )
But to us there is but one God , the Father , of whom are all things , and we in him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ , by whom are all things , and we by him .
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge : for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an idol ; and their conscience being weak is defiled .
But meat commendeth us not to God : for neither , if we eat , are we the better ; neither , if we eat not , are we the worse .
But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak .
For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol ' s temple , shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols .
And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish , for whom Christ died ?
But when ye sin so against the brethren , and wound their weak conscience , ye sin against Christ .
Wherefore , if meat make my brother to offend , I will eat no flesh while the world standeth , lest I make my brother to offend .
Am I not an apostle ? am I not free ? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord ? are not ye my work in the Lord ?
If I be not an apostle unto others , yet doubtless I am to you : for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord .
Mine answer to them that do examine me is this .
Have we not power to eat and to drink ?
Have we not power to lead about a sister , a wife , as well as other apostles , and as the brethren of the Lord , and Cephas ?
Or I only and Barnabas , have not we power to forbear working ?
Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges ? who planteth a vineyard , and eateth not of the fruit thereof ? or who feedeth a flock , and eateth not of the milk of the flock ?
Say I these things as a man ? or saith not the law the same also ?
For it is written in the law of Moses , Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn . Doth God take care for oxen ?
Or saith he it altogether for our sakes ? For our sakes , no doubt , this is written : that he that ploweth should plow in hope ; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope .
If we have sown unto you spiritual things , is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things ?
If others be partakers of this power over you , are not we rather ? Nevertheless we have not used this power ; but suffer all things , lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ .
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the temple ? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar ?
Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel .
But I have used none of these things : neither have I written these things , that it should be so done unto me : for it were better for me to die , than that any man should make my glorying void .
For though I preach the gospel , I have nothing to glory of : for necessity is laid upon me ; yea , woe is unto me , if I preach not the gospel !
For if I do this thing willingly , I have a reward : but if against my will , a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me .
What is my reward then ? Verily that , when I preach the gospel , I may make the gospel of Christ without charge , that I abuse not my power in the gospel .
For though I be free from all men , yet have I made myself servant unto all , that I might gain the more .
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew , that I might gain the Jews ; to them that are under the law , as under the law , that I might gain them that are under the law .
To them that are without law , as without law , ( being not without law to God , but under the law to Christ , ) that I might gain them that are without law .
To the weak became I as weak , that I might gain the weak : I am made all things to all men , that I might by all means save some .
And this I do for the gospel ' s sake , that I might be partaker thereof with you .
Know ye not that they which run in a race run all , but one receiveth the prize ? So run , that ye may obtain .
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things . Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown ; but we an incorruptible .
I therefore so run , not as uncertainly ; so fight I , not as one that beateth the air .
But I keep under my body , and bring it into subjection : lest that by any means , when I have preached to others , I myself should be a castaway .
Moreover , brethren , I would not that ye should be ignorant , how that all our fathers were under the cloud , and all passed through the sea .
And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea .
And did all eat the same spiritual meat .
And did all drink the same spiritual drink : for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them : and that Rock was Christ .
But with many of them God was not well pleased : for they were overthrown in the wilderness .
Now these things were our examples , to the intent we should not lust after evil things , as they also lusted .
Neither be ye idolaters , as were some of them ; as it is written , The people sat down to eat and drink , and rose up to play .
Neither let us commit fornication , as some of them committed , and fell in one day three and twenty thousand .
Neither let us tempt Christ , as some of them also tempted , and were destroyed of serpents .
Neither murmur ye , as some of them also murmured , and were destroyed of the destroyer .
Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples : and they are written for our admonition , upon whom the ends of the world are come .
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall .
There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man : but God is faithful , who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able ; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape , that ye may be able to bear it .
Wherefore , my dearly beloved , flee from idolatry .
I speak as to wise men ; judge ye what I say .
The cup of blessing which we bless , is it not the communion of the blood of Christ ? The bread which we break , is it not the communion of the body of Christ ?
For we being many are one bread , and one body : for we are all partakers of that one bread .
Behold Israel after the flesh : are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar ?
What say I then ? that the idol is any thing , or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing ?
But I say , that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice , they sacrifice to devils , and not to God : and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils .
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord , and the cup of devils : ye cannot be partakers of the Lord ' s table , and of the table of devils .
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy ? are we stronger than he ?
All things are lawful for me , but all things are not expedient : all things are lawful for me , but all things edify not .
Let no man seek his own , but every man another ' s wealth .
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles , that eat , asking no question for conscience sake .
For the earth is the Lord ' s , and the fulness thereof .
If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast , and ye be disposed to go ; whatsoever is set before you , eat , asking no question for conscience sake .
But if any man say unto you , This is offered in sacrifice unto idols , eat not for his sake that shewed it , and for conscience sake : for the earth is the Lord ' s , and the fulness thereof .
Conscience , I say , not thine own , but of the other : for why is my liberty judged of another man ' s conscience ?
For if I by grace be a partaker , why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks ?
Whether therefore ye eat , or drink , or whatsoever ye do , do all to the glory of God .
Give none offence , neither to the Jews , nor to the Gentiles , nor to the church of God .
Even as I please all men in all things , not seeking mine own profit , but the profit of many , that they may be saved .
Be ye followers of me , even as I also am of Christ .
Now I praise you , brethren , that ye remember me in all things , and keep the ordinances , as I delivered them to you .
But I would have you know , that the head of every man is Christ ; and the head of the woman is the man ; and the head of Christ is God .
Every man praying or prophesying , having his head covered , dishonoureth his head .
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head : for that is even all one as if she were shaven .
For if the woman be not covered , let her also be shorn : but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven , let her be covered .
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head , forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God : but the woman is the glory of the man .
For the man is not of the woman ; but the woman of the man .
Neither was the man created for the woman ; but the woman for the man .
For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of the angels .
Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman , neither the woman without the man , in the Lord .
For as the woman is of the man , even so is the man also by the woman ; but all things of God .
Judge in yourselves : is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered ?
Doth not even nature itself teach you , that , if a man have long hair , it is a shame unto him ?
But if a woman have long hair , it is a glory to her : for her hair is given her for a covering .
But if any man seem to be contentious , we have no such custom , neither the churches of God .
Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not , that ye come together not for the better , but for the worse .
For first of all , when ye come together in the church , I hear that there be divisions among you ; and I partly believe it .
For there must be also heresies among you , that they which are approved may be made manifest among you .
When ye come together therefore into one place , this is not to eat the Lord ' s supper .
For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper : and one is hungry , and another is drunken .
What ? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in ? or despise ye the church of God , and shame them that have not ? What shall I say to you ? shall I praise you in this ? I praise you not .
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you , That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread .
And when he had given thanks , he brake it , and said , Take , eat : this is my body , which is broken for you : this do in remembrance of me .
After the same manner also he took the cup , when he had supped , saying , This cup is the new testament in my blood : this do ye , as oft as ye drink it , in remembrance of me .
For as often as ye eat this bread , and drink this cup , ye do shew the Lord ' s death till he come .
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread , and drink this cup of the Lord , unworthily , shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord .
But let a man examine himself , and so let him eat of that bread , and drink of that cup .
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily , eateth and drinketh damnation to himself , not discerning the Lord ' s body .
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you , and many sleep .
For if we would judge ourselves , we should not be judged .
But when we are judged , we are chastened of the Lord , that we should not be condemned with the world .
Wherefore , my brethren , when ye come together to eat , tarry one for another .
And if any man hunger , let him eat at home ; that ye come not together unto condemnation . And the rest will I set in order when I come .
Now concerning spiritual gifts , brethren , I would not have you ignorant .
Ye know that ye were Gentiles , carried away unto these dumb idols , even as ye were led .
Wherefore I give you to understand , that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed : and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord , but by the Holy Ghost .
Now there are diversities of gifts , but the same Spirit .
And there are differences of administrations , but the same Lord .
And there are diversities of operations , but it is the same God which worketh all in all .
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal .
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom ; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit .
To another faith by the same Spirit ; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit .
To another the working of miracles ; to another prophecy ; to another discerning of spirits ; to another divers kinds of tongues ; to another the interpretation of tongues .
But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit , dividing to every man severally as he will .
For as the body is one , and hath many members , and all the members of that one body , being many , are one body : so also is Christ .
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body , whether we be Jews or Gentiles , whether we be bond or free ; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit .
For the body is not one member , but many .
If the foot shall say , Because I am not the hand , I am not of the body ; is it therefore not of the body ?
And if the ear shall say , Because I am not the eye , I am not of the body ; is it therefore not of the body ?
If the whole body were an eye , where were the hearing ? If the whole were hearing , where were the smelling ?
But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body , as it hath pleased him .
And if they were all one member , where were the body ?
But now are they many members , yet but one body .
And the eye cannot say unto the hand , I have no need of thee : nor again the head to the feet , I have no need of you .
Nay , much more those members of the body , which seem to be more feeble , are necessary .
And those members of the body , which we think to be less honourable , upon these we bestow more abundant honour ; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness .
For our comely parts have no need : but God hath tempered the body together , having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked .
That there should be no schism in the body ; but that the members should have the same care one for another .
And whether one member suffer , all the members suffer with it ; or one member be honoured , all the members rejoice with it .
Now ye are the body of Christ , and members in particular .
And God hath set some in the church , first apostles , secondarily prophets , thirdly teachers , after that miracles , then gifts of healings , helps , governments , diversities of tongues .
Are all apostles ? are all prophets ? are all teachers ? are all workers of miracles ?
Have all the gifts of healing ? do all speak with tongues ? do all interpret ?
But covet earnestly the best gifts : and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way .
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels , and have not charity , I am become as sounding brass , or a tinkling cymbal .
And though I have the gift of prophecy , and understand all mysteries , and all knowledge ; and though I have all faith , so that I could remove mountains , and have not charity , I am nothing .
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor , and though I give my body to be burned , and have not charity , it profiteth me nothing .
Charity suffereth long , and is kind ; charity envieth not ; charity vaunteth not itself , is not puffed up .
Doth not behave itself unseemly , seeketh not her own , is not easily provoked , thinketh no evil .
Rejoiceth not in iniquity , but rejoiceth in the truth .
Beareth all things , believeth all things , hopeth all things , endureth all things .
Charity never faileth : but whether there be prophecies , they shall fail ; whether there be tongues , they shall cease ; whether there be knowledge , it shall vanish away .
For we know in part , and we prophesy in part .
But when that which is perfect is come , then that which is in part shall be done away .
When I was a child , I spake as a child , I understood as a child , I thought as a child : but when I became a man , I put away childish things .
For now we see through a glass , darkly ; but then face to face : now I know in part ; but then shall I know even as also I am known .
And now abideth faith , hope , charity , these three ; but the greatest of these is charity .
Follow after charity , and desire spiritual gifts , but rather that ye may prophesy .
For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men , but unto God : for no man understandeth him ; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries .
But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification , and exhortation , and comfort .
He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself ; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church .
I would that ye all spake with tongues , but rather that ye prophesied : for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues , except he interpret , that the church may receive edifying .
Now , brethren , if I come unto you speaking with tongues , what shall I profit you , except I shall speak to you either by revelation , or by knowledge , or by prophesying , or by doctrine ?
And even things without life giving sound , whether pipe or harp , except they give a distinction in the sounds , how shall it be known what is piped or harped ?
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound , who shall prepare himself to the battle ?
So likewise ye , except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood , how shall it be known what is spoken ? for ye shall speak into the air .
There are , it may be , so many kinds of voices in the world , and none of them is without signification .
Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice , I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian , and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me .
Even so ye , forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts , seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church .
Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret .
For if I pray in an unknown tongue , my spirit prayeth , but my understanding is unfruitful .
What is it then ? I will pray with the spirit , and I will pray with the understanding also : I will sing with the spirit , and I will sing with the understanding also .
Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit , how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks , seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest ?
For thou verily givest thanks well , but the other is not edified .
I thank my God , I speak with tongues more than ye all .
Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding , that by my voice I might teach others also , than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue .
Brethren , be not children in understanding : howbeit in malice be ye children , but in understanding be men .
In the law it is written , With men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people ; and yet for all that will they not hear me , saith the Lord .
Wherefore tongues are for a sign , not to them that believe , but to them that believe not : but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not , but for them which believe .
If therefore the whole church be come together into one place , and all speak with tongues , and there come in those that are unlearned , or unbelievers , will they not say that ye are mad ?
But if all prophesy , and there come in one that believeth not , or one unlearned , he is convinced of all , he is judged of all .
And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest ; and so falling down on his face he will worship God , and report that God is in you of a truth .
How is it then , brethren ? when ye come together , every one of you hath a psalm , hath a doctrine , hath a tongue , hath a revelation , hath an interpretation . Let all things be done unto edifying .
If any man speak in an unknown tongue , let it be by two , or at the most by three , and that by course ; and let one interpret .
But if there be no interpreter , let him keep silence in the church ; and let him speak to himself , and to God .
Let the prophets speak two or three , and let the other judge .
If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by , let the first hold his peace .
For ye may all prophesy one by one , that all may learn , and all may be comforted .
And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets .
For God is not the author of confusion , but of peace , as in all churches of the saints .
Let your women keep silence in the churches : for it is not permitted unto them to speak ; but they are commanded to be under obedience , as also saith the law .
And if they will learn any thing , let them ask their husbands at home : for it is a shame for women to speak in the church .
What ? came the word of God out from you ? or came it unto you only ?
If any man think himself to be a prophet , or spiritual , let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord .
But if any man be ignorant , let him be ignorant .
Wherefore , brethren , covet to prophesy , and forbid not to speak with tongues .
Let all things be done decently and in order .
Moreover , brethren , I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you , which also ye have received , and wherein ye stand .
By which also ye are saved , if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you , unless ye have believed in vain .
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received , how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures .
And that he was buried , and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures .
And that he was seen of Cephas , then of the twelve .
After that , he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once ; of whom the greater part remain unto this present , but some are fallen asleep .
After that , he was seen of James ; then of all the apostles .
And last of all he was seen of me also , as of one born out of due time .
For I am the least of the apostles , that am not meet to be called an apostle , because I persecuted the church of God .
But by the grace of God I am what I am : and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain ; but I laboured more abundantly than they all : yet not I , but the grace of God which was with me .
Therefore whether it were I or they , so we preach , and so ye believed .
Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead , how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead ?
But if there be no resurrection of the dead , then is Christ not risen .
And if Christ be not risen , then is our preaching vain , and your faith is also vain .
Yea , and we are found false witnesses of God ; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ : whom he raised not up , if so be that the dead rise not .
For if the dead rise not , then is not Christ raised .
And if Christ be not raised , your faith is vain ; ye are yet in your sins .
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished .
If in this life only we have hope in Christ , we are of all men most miserable .
But now is Christ risen from the dead , and become the firstfruits of them that slept .
For since by man came death , by man came also the resurrection of the dead .
For as in Adam all die , even so in Christ shall all be made alive .
But every man in his own order : Christ the firstfruits ; afterward they that are Christ ' s at his coming .
Then cometh the end , when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God , even the Father ; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power .
For he must reign , till he hath put all enemies under his feet .
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death .
For he hath put all things under his feet . But when he saith all things are put under him , it is manifest that he is excepted , which did put all things under him .
And when all things shall be subdued unto him , then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him , that God may be all in all .
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead , if the dead rise not at all ? why are they then baptized for the dead ?
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour ?
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord , I die daily .
If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus , what advantageth it me , if the dead rise not ? let us eat and drink ; for to morrow we die .
Be not deceived : evil communications corrupt good manners .
Awake to righteousness , and sin not ; for some have not the knowledge of God : I speak this to your shame .
But some man will say , How are the dead raised up ? and with what body do they come ?
Thou fool , that which thou sowest is not quickened , except it die .
And that which thou sowest , thou sowest not that body that shall be , but bare grain , it may chance of wheat , or of some other grain .
But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him , and to every seed his own body .
All flesh is not the same flesh : but there is one kind of flesh of men , another flesh of beasts , another of fishes , and another of birds .
There are also celestial bodies , and bodies terrestrial : but the glory of the celestial is one , and the glory of the terrestrial is another .
There is one glory of the sun , and another glory of the moon , and another glory of the stars : for one star differeth from another star in glory .
So also is the resurrection of the dead . It is sown in corruption ; it is raised in incorruption .
It is sown in dishonour ; it is raised in glory : it is sown in weakness ; it is raised in power .
It is sown a natural body ; it is raised a spiritual body . There is a natural body , and there is a spiritual body .
And so it is written , The first man Adam was made a living soul ; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit .
Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual , but that which is natural ; and afterward that which is spiritual .
The first man is of the earth , earthy : the second man is the Lord from heaven .
As is the earthy , such are they also that are earthy : and as is the heavenly , such are they also that are heavenly .
And as we have borne the image of the earthy , we shall also bear the image of the heavenly .
Now this I say , brethren , that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God ; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption .
Behold , I shew you a mystery ; We shall not all sleep , but we shall all be changed .
In a moment , in the twinkling of an eye , at the last trump : for the trumpet shall sound , and the dead shall be raised incorruptible , and we shall be changed .
For this corruptible must put on incorruption , and this mortal must put on immortality .
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption , and this mortal shall have put on immortality , then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written , Death is swallowed up in victory .
O death , where is thy sting ? O grave , where is thy victory ?
The sting of death is sin ; and the strength of sin is the law .
But thanks be to God , which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ .
Therefore , my beloved brethren , be ye stedfast , unmoveable , always abounding in the work of the Lord , forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord .
Now concerning the collection for the saints , as I have given order to the churches of Galatia , even so do ye .
Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store , as God hath prospered him , that there be no gatherings when I come .
And when I come , whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters , them will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem .
And if it be meet that I go also , they shall go with me .
Now I will come unto you , when I shall pass through Macedonia : for I do pass through Macedonia .
And it may be that I will abide , yea , and winter with you , that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go .
For I will not see you now by the way ; but I trust to tarry a while with you , if the Lord permit .
But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost .
For a great door and effectual is opened unto me , and there are many adversaries .
Now if Timotheus come , see that he may be with you without fear : for he worketh the work of the Lord , as I also do .
Let no man therefore despise him : but conduct him forth in peace , that he may come unto me : for I look for him with the brethren .
As touching our brother Apollos , I greatly desired him to come unto you with the brethren : but his will was not at all to come at this time ; but he will come when he shall have convenient time .
Watch ye , stand fast in the faith , quit you like men , be strong .
Let all your things be done with charity .
I beseech you , brethren , ( ye know the house of Stephanas , that it is the firstfruits of Achaia , and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints , )
That ye submit yourselves unto such , and to every one that helpeth with us , and laboureth .
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus : for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied .
For they have refreshed my spirit and yours : therefore acknowledge ye them that are such .
The churches of Asia salute you . Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord , with the church that is in their house .
All the brethren greet you . Greet ye one another with an holy kiss .
The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand .
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ , let him be Anathema Maranatha .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you .
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus . Amen .
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God , and Timothy our brother , unto the church of God which is at Corinth , with all the saints which are in all Achaia .
Grace be to you and peace from God our Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ .
Blessed be God , even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of mercies , and the God of all comfort .
Who comforteth us in all our tribulation , that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble , by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God .
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us , so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ .
And whether we be afflicted , it is for your consolation and salvation , which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer : or whether we be comforted , it is for your consolation and salvation .
And our hope of you is stedfast , knowing , that as ye are partakers of the sufferings , so shall ye be also of the consolation .
For we would not , brethren , have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia , that we were pressed out of measure , above strength , insomuch that we despaired even of life .
But we had the sentence of death in ourselves , that we should not trust in ourselves , but in God which raiseth the dead .
Who delivered us from so great a death , and doth deliver : in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us .
Ye also helping together by prayer for us , that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given by many on our behalf .
For our rejoicing is this , the testimony of our conscience , that in simplicity and godly sincerity , not with fleshly wisdom , but by the grace of God , we have had our conversation in the world , and more abundantly to you - ward .
For we write none other things unto you , than what ye read or acknowledge ; and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end .
As also ye have acknowledged us in part , that we are your rejoicing , even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus .
And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before , that ye might have a second benefit .
And to pass by you into Macedonia , and to come again out of Macedonia unto you , and of you to be brought on my way toward Judaea .
When I therefore was thus minded , did I use lightness ? or the things that I purpose , do I purpose according to the flesh , that with me there should be yea yea , and nay nay ?
But as God is true , our word toward you was not yea and nay .
For the Son of God , Jesus Christ , who was preached among you by us , even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus , was not yea and nay , but in him was yea .
For all the promises of God in him are yea , and in him Amen , unto the glory of God by us .
Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ , and hath anointed us , is God .
Who hath also sealed us , and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts .
Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul , that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth .
Not for that we have dominion over your faith , but are helpers of your joy : for by faith ye stand .
But I determined this with myself , that I would not come again to you in heaviness .
For if I make you sorry , who is he then that maketh me glad , but the same which is made sorry by me ?
And I wrote this same unto you , lest , when I came , I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice ; having confidence in you all , that my joy is the joy of you all .
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears ; not that ye should be grieved , but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you .
But if any have caused grief , he hath not grieved me , but in part : that I may not overcharge you all .
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment , which was inflicted of many .
So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him , and comfort him , lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow .
Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him .
For to this end also did I write , that I might know the proof of you , whether ye be obedient in all things .
To whom ye forgive any thing , I forgive also : for if I forgave any thing , to whom I forgave it , for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ .
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us : for we are not ignorant of his devices .
Furthermore , when I came to Troas to preach Christ ' s gospel , and a door was opened unto me of the Lord .
I had no rest in my spirit , because I found not Titus my brother : but taking my leave of them , I went from thence into Macedonia .
Now thanks be unto God , which always causeth us to triumph in Christ , and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place .
For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ , in them that are saved , and in them that perish .
To the one we are the savour of death unto death ; and to the other the savour of life unto life . And who is sufficient for these things ?
For we are not as many , which corrupt the word of God : but as of sincerity , but as of God , in the sight of God speak we in Christ .
Do we begin again to commend ourselves ? or need we , as some others , epistles of commendation to you , or letters of commendation from you ?
Ye are our epistle written in our hearts , known and read of all men .
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us , written not with ink , but with the Spirit of the living God ; not in tables of stone , but in fleshy tables of the heart .
And such trust have we through Christ to God - ward .
Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves ; but our sufficiency is of God .
Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament ; not of the letter , but of the spirit : for the letter killeth , but the spirit giveth life .
But if the ministration of death , written and engraven in stones , was glorious , so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance ; which glory was to be done away .
How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious ?
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory , much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory .
For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect , by reason of the glory that excelleth .
For if that which is done away was glorious , much more that which remaineth is glorious .
Seeing then that we have such hope , we use great plainness of speech .
And not as Moses , which put a vail over his face , that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is abolished .
But their minds were blinded : for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament ; which vail is done away in Christ .
But even unto this day , when Moses is read , the vail is upon their heart .
Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord , the vail shall be taken away .
Now the Lord is that Spirit : and where the Spirit of the Lord is , there is liberty .
But we all , with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord , are changed into the same image from glory to glory , even as by the Spirit of the Lord .
Therefore seeing we have this ministry , as we have received mercy , we faint not .
But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty , not walking in craftiness , nor handling the word of God deceitfully ; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man ' s conscience in the sight of God .
But if our gospel be hid , it is hid to them that are lost .
In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not , lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ , who is the image of God , should shine unto them .
For we preach not ourselves , but Christ Jesus the Lord ; and ourselves your servants for Jesus ' sake .
For God , who commanded the light to shine out of darkness , hath shined in our hearts , to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ .
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels , that the excellency of the power may be of God , and not of us .
We are troubled on every side , yet not distressed ; we are perplexed , but not in despair .
Persecuted , but not forsaken ; cast down , but not destroyed .
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus , that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body .
For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus ' sake , that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh .
So then death worketh in us , but life in you .
We having the same spirit of faith , according as it is written , I believed , and therefore have I spoken ; we also believe , and therefore speak .
Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus , and shall present us with you .
For all things are for your sakes , that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God .
For which cause we faint not ; but though our outward man perish , yet the inward man is renewed day by day .
For our light affliction , which is but for a moment , worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory .
While we look not at the things which are seen , but at the things which are not seen : for the things which are seen are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are eternal .
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved , we have a building of God , an house not made with hands , eternal in the heavens .
For in this we groan , earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven .
If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked .
For we that are in this tabernacle do groan , being burdened : not for that we would be unclothed , but clothed upon , that mortality might be swallowed up of life .
Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God , who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit .
Therefore we are always confident , knowing that , whilst we are at home in the body , we are absent from the Lord .
( For we walk by faith , not by sight : )
We are confident , I say , and willing rather to be absent from the body , and to be present with the Lord .
Wherefore we labour , that , whether present or absent , we may be accepted of him .
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ ; that every one may receive the things done in his body , according to that he hath done , whether it be good or bad .
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord , we persuade men ; but we are made manifest unto God ; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences .
For we commend not ourselves again unto you , but give you occasion to glory on our behalf , that ye may have somewhat to answer them which glory in appearance , and not in heart .
For whether we be beside ourselves , it is to God : or whether we be sober , it is for your cause .
For the love of Christ constraineth us ; because we thus judge , that if one died for all , then were all dead .
And that he died for all , that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves , but unto him which died for them , and rose again .
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh : yea , though we have known Christ after the flesh , yet now henceforth know we him no more .
Therefore if any man be in Christ , he is a new creature : old things are passed away ; behold , all things are become new .
And all things are of God , who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ , and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation .
To wit , that God was in Christ , reconciling the world unto himself , not imputing their trespasses unto them ; and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation .
Now then we are ambassadors for Christ , as though God did beseech you by us : we pray you in Christ ' s stead , be ye reconciled to God .
For he hath made him to be sin for us , who knew no sin ; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him .
We then , as workers together with him , beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain .
( For he saith , I have heard thee in a time accepted , and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee : behold , now is the accepted time ; behold , now is the day of salvation . )
Giving no offence in any thing , that the ministry be not blamed .
But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God , in much patience , in afflictions , in necessities , in distresses .
In stripes , in imprisonments , in tumults , in labours , in watchings , in fastings .
By pureness , by knowledge , by longsuffering , by kindness , by the Holy Ghost , by love unfeigned .
By the word of truth , by the power of God , by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left .
By honour and dishonour , by evil report and good report : as deceivers , and yet true .
As unknown , and yet well known ; as dying , and , behold , we live ; as chastened , and not killed .
As sorrowful , yet alway rejoicing ; as poor , yet making many rich ; as having nothing , and yet possessing all things .
O ye Corinthians , our mouth is open unto you , our heart is enlarged .
Ye are not straitened in us , but ye are straitened in your own bowels .
Now for a recompence in the same , ( I speak as unto my children , ) be ye also enlarged .
Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers : for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness ? and what communion hath light with darkness ?
And what concord hath Christ with Belial ? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel ?
And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols ? for ye are the temple of the living God ; as God hath said , I will dwell in them , and walk in them ; and I will be their God , and they shall be my people .
Wherefore come out from among them , and be ye separate , saith the Lord , and touch not the unclean thing ; and I will receive you .
And will be a Father unto you , and ye shall be my sons and daughters , saith the Lord Almighty .
Having therefore these promises , dearly beloved , let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in the fear of God .
Receive us ; we have wronged no man , we have corrupted no man , we have defrauded no man .
I speak not this to condemn you : for I have said before , that ye are in our hearts to die and live with you .
Great is my boldness of speech toward you , great is my glorying of you : I am filled with comfort , I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation .
For , when we were come into Macedonia , our flesh had no rest , but we were troubled on every side ; without were fightings , within were fears .
Nevertheless God , that comforteth those that are cast down , comforted us by the coming of Titus .
And not by his coming only , but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you , when he told us your earnest desire , your mourning , your fervent mind toward me ; so that I rejoiced the more .
For though I made you sorry with a letter , I do not repent , though I did repent : for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry , though it were but for a season .
Now I rejoice , not that ye were made sorry , but that ye sorrowed to repentance : for ye were made sorry after a godly manner , that ye might receive damage by us in nothing .
For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of : but the sorrow of the world worketh death .
For behold this selfsame thing , that ye sorrowed after a godly sort , what carefulness it wrought in you , yea , what clearing of yourselves , yea , what indignation , yea , what fear , yea , what vehement desire , yea , what zeal , yea , what revenge ! In all things ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter .
Wherefore , though I wrote unto you , I did it not for his cause that had done the wrong , nor for his cause that suffered wrong , but that our care for you in the sight of God might appear unto you .
Therefore we were comforted in your comfort : yea , and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus , because his spirit was refreshed by you all .
For if I have boasted any thing to him of you , I am not ashamed ; but as we spake all things to you in truth , even so our boasting , which I made before Titus , is found a truth .
And his inward affection is more abundant toward you , whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all , how with fear and trembling ye received him .
I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all things .
Moreover , brethren , we do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on the churches of Macedonia .
How that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality .
For to their power , I bear record , yea , and beyond their power they were willing of themselves .
Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift , and take upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the saints .
And this they did , not as we hoped , but first gave their own selves to the Lord , and unto us by the will of God .
Insomuch that we desired Titus , that as he had begun , so he would also finish in you the same grace also .
Therefore , as ye abound in every thing , in faith , and utterance , and knowledge , and in all diligence , and in your love to us , see that ye abound in this grace also .
I speak not by commandment , but by occasion of the forwardness of others , and to prove the sincerity of your love .
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ , that , though he was rich , yet for your sakes he became poor , that ye through his poverty might be rich .
And herein I give my advice : for this is expedient for you , who have begun before , not only to do , but also to be forward a year ago .
Now therefore perform the doing of it ; that as there was a readiness to will , so there may be a performance also out of that which ye have .
For if there be first a willing mind , it is accepted according to that a man hath , and not according to that he hath not .
For I mean not that other men be eased , and ye burdened .
But by an equality , that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want , that their abundance also may be a supply for your want : that there may be equality .
As it is written , He that had gathered much had nothing over ; and he that had gathered little had no lack .
But thanks be to God , which put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you .
For indeed he accepted the exhortation ; but being more forward , of his own accord he went unto you .
And we have sent with him the brother , whose praise is in the gospel throughout all the churches .
And not that only , but who was also chosen of the churches to travel with us with this grace , which is administered by us to the glory of the same Lord , and declaration of your ready mind .
Avoiding this , that no man should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us .
Providing for honest things , not only in the sight of the Lord , but also in the sight of men .
And we have sent with them our brother , whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many things , but now much more diligent , upon the great confidence which I have in you .
Whether any do enquire of Titus , he is my partner and fellowhelper concerning you : or our brethren be enquired of , they are the messengers of the churches , and the glory of Christ .
Wherefore shew ye to them , and before the churches , the proof of your love , and of our boasting on your behalf .
For as touching the ministering to the saints , it is superfluous for me to write to you .
For I know the forwardness of your mind , for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia , that Achaia was ready a year ago ; and your zeal hath provoked very many .
Yet have I sent the brethren , lest our boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf ; that , as I said , ye may be ready .
Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me , and find you unprepared , we ( that we say not , ye ) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting .
Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren , that they would go before unto you , and make up beforehand your bounty , whereof ye had notice before , that the same might be ready , as a matter of bounty , and not as of covetousness .
But this I say , He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly ; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully .
Every man according as he purposeth in his heart , so let him give ; not grudgingly , or of necessity : for God loveth a cheerful giver .
And God is able to make all grace abound toward you ; that ye , always having all sufficiency in all things , may abound to every good work .
( As it is written , He hath dispersed abroad ; he hath given to the poor : his righteousness remaineth for ever .
Now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minister bread for your food , and multiply your seed sown , and increase the fruits of your righteousness ; )
Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness , which causeth through us thanksgiving to God .
For the administration of this service not only supplieth the want of the saints , but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God .
Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ , and for your liberal distribution unto them , and unto all men .
And by their prayer for you , which long after you for the exceeding grace of God in you .
Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift .
Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ , who in presence am base among you , but being absent am bold toward you .
But I beseech you , that I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence , wherewith I think to be bold against some , which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh .
For though we walk in the flesh , we do not war after the flesh .
( For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal , but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds ; )
Casting down imaginations , and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God , and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ .
And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience , when your obedience is fulfilled .
Do ye look on things after the outward appearance ? If any man trust to himself that he is Christ ' s , let him of himself think this again , that , as he is Christ ' s , even so are we Christ ' s .
For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority , which the Lord hath given us for edification , and not for your destruction , I should not be ashamed .
That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters .
For his letters , say they , are weighty and powerful ; but his bodily presence is weak , and his speech contemptible .
Let such an one think this , that , such as we are in word by letters when we are absent , such will we be also in deed when we are present .
For we dare not make ourselves of the number , or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves : but they measuring themselves by themselves , and comparing themselves among themselves , are not wise .
But we will not boast of things without our measure , but according to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us , a measure to reach even unto you .
For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure , as though we reached not unto you : for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the gospel of Christ .
Not boasting of things without our measure , that is , of other men ' s labours ; but having hope , when your faith is increased , that we shall be enlarged by you according to our rule abundantly .
To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you , and not to boast in another man ' s line of things made ready to our hand .
But he that glorieth , let him glory in the Lord .
For not he that commendeth himself is approved , but whom the Lord commendeth .
Would to God ye could bear with me a little in my folly : and indeed bear with me .
For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy : for I have espoused you to one husband , that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ .
But I fear , lest by any means , as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty , so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ .
For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus , whom we have not preached , or if ye receive another spirit , which ye have not received , or another gospel , which ye have not accepted , ye might well bear with him .
For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles .
But though I be rude in speech , yet not in knowledge ; but we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things .
Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted , because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely ?
I robbed other churches , taking wages of them , to do you service .
And when I was present with you , and wanted , I was chargeable to no man : for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied : and in all things I have kept myself from being burdensome unto you , and so will I keep myself .
As the truth of Christ is in me , no man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia .
Wherefore ? because I love you not ? God knoweth .
But what I do , that I will do , that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion ; that wherein they glory , they may be found even as we .
For such are false apostles , deceitful workers , transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ .
And no marvel ; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light .
Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness ; whose end shall be according to their works .
I say again , Let no man think me a fool ; if otherwise , yet as a fool receive me , that I may boast myself a little .
That which I speak , I speak it not after the Lord , but as it were foolishly , in this confidence of boasting .
Seeing that many glory after the flesh , I will glory also .
For ye suffer fools gladly , seeing ye yourselves are wise .
For ye suffer , if a man bring you into bondage , if a man devour you , if a man take of you , if a man exalt himself , if a man smite you on the face .
I speak as concerning reproach , as though we had been weak . Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold , ( I speak foolishly , ) I am bold also .
Are they Hebrews ? so am I . Are they Israelites ? so am I . Are they the seed of Abraham ? so am I .
Are they ministers of Christ ? ( I speak as a fool ) I am more ; in labours more abundant , in stripes above measure , in prisons more frequent , in deaths oft .
Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one .
Thrice was I beaten with rods , once was I stoned , thrice I suffered shipwreck , a night and a day I have been in the deep .
In journeyings often , in perils of waters , in perils of robbers , in perils by mine own countrymen , in perils by the heathen , in perils in the city , in perils in the wilderness , in perils in the sea , in perils among false brethren .
In weariness and painfulness , in watchings often , in hunger and thirst , in fastings often , in cold and nakedness .
Beside those things that are without , that which cometh upon me daily , the care of all the churches .
Who is weak , and I am not weak ? who is offended , and I burn not ?
If I must needs glory , I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities .
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , which is blessed for evermore , knoweth that I lie not .
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison , desirous to apprehend me .
And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall , and escaped his hands .
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory . I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord .
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago , ( whether in the body , I cannot tell ; or whether out of the body , I cannot tell : God knoweth ; ) such an one caught up to the third heaven .
And I knew such a man , ( whether in the body , or out of the body , I cannot tell : God knoweth ; )
How that he was caught up into paradise , and heard unspeakable words , which it is not lawful for a man to utter .
Of such an one will I glory : yet of myself I will not glory , but in mine infirmities .
For though I would desire to glory , I shall not be a fool ; for I will say the truth : but now I forbear , lest any man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be , or that he heareth of me .
And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations , there was given to me a thorn in the flesh , the messenger of Satan to buffet me , lest I should be exalted above measure .
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice , that it might depart from me .
And he said unto me , My grace is sufficient for thee : for my strength is made perfect in weakness . Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities , that the power of Christ may rest upon me .
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities , in reproaches , in necessities , in persecutions , in distresses for Christ ' s sake : for when I am weak , then am I strong .
I am become a fool in glorying ; ye have compelled me : for I ought to have been commended of you : for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles , though I be nothing .
Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience , in signs , and wonders , and mighty deeds .
For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches , except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you ? forgive me this wrong .
Behold , the third time I am ready to come to you ; and I will not be burdensome to you : for I seek not yours , but you : for the children ought not to lay up for the parents , but the parents for the children .
And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you ; though the more abundantly I love you , the less I be loved .
But be it so , I did not burden you : nevertheless , being crafty , I caught you with guile .
Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you ?
I desired Titus , and with him I sent a brother . Did Titus make a gain of you ? walked we not in the same spirit ? walked we not in the same steps ?
Again , think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you ? we speak before God in Christ : but we do all things , dearly beloved , for your edifying .
For I fear , lest , when I come , I shall not find you such as I would , and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not : lest there be debates , envyings , wraths , strifes , backbitings , whisperings , swellings , tumults .
And lest , when I come again , my God will humble me among you , and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already , and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed .
This is the third time I am coming to you . In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established .
I told you before , and foretell you , as if I were present , the second time ; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned , and to all other , that , if I come again , I will not spare .
Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me , which to you - ward is not weak , but is mighty in you .
For though he was crucified through weakness , yet he liveth by the power of God . For we also are weak in him , but we shall live with him by the power of God toward you .
Examine yourselves , whether ye be in the faith ; prove your own selves . Know ye not your own selves , how that Jesus Christ is in you , except ye be reprobates ?
But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates .
Now I pray to God that ye do no evil ; not that we should appear approved , but that ye should do that which is honest , though we be as reprobates .
For we can do nothing against the truth , but for the truth .
For we are glad , when we are weak , and ye are strong : and this also we wish , even your perfection .
Therefore I write these things being absent , lest being present I should use sharpness , according to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification , and not to destruction .
Finally , brethren , farewell . Be perfect , be of good comfort , be of one mind , live in peace ; and the God of love and peace shall be with you .
Greet one another with an holy kiss .
All the saints salute you .
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ , and the love of God , and the communion of the Holy Ghost , be with you all . Amen .
Paul , an apostle , ( not of men , neither by man , but by Jesus Christ , and God the Father , who raised him from the dead ; )
And all the brethren which are with me , unto the churches of Galatia .
Grace be to you and peace from God the Father , and from our Lord Jesus Christ .
Who gave himself for our sins , that he might deliver us from this present evil world , according to the will of God and our Father .
To whom be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel .
Which is not another ; but there be some that trouble you , and would pervert the gospel of Christ .
But though we , or an angel from heaven , preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you , let him be accursed .
As we said before , so say I now again , If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received , let him be accursed .
For do I now persuade men , or God ? or do I seek to please men ? for if I yet pleased men , I should not be the servant of Christ .
But I certify you , brethren , that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man .
For I neither received it of man , neither was I taught it , but by the revelation of Jesus Christ .
For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews ' religion , how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God , and wasted it .
And profited in the Jews ' religion above many my equals in mine own nation , being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers .
But when it pleased God , who separated me from my mother ' s womb , and called me by his grace .
To reveal his Son in me , that I might preach him among the heathen ; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood .
Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me ; but I went into Arabia , and returned again unto Damascus .
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter , and abode with him fifteen days .
But other of the apostles saw I none , save James the Lord ' s brother .
Now the things which I write unto you , behold , before God , I lie not .
Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia .
And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were in Christ .
But they had heard only , That he which persecuted us in times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed .
And they glorified God in me .
Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas , and took Titus with me also .
And I went up by revelation , and communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles , but privately to them which were of reputation , lest by any means I should run , or had run , in vain .
But neither Titus , who was with me , being a Greek , was compelled to be circumcised .
And that because of false brethren unawares brought in , who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus , that they might bring us into bondage .
To whom we gave place by subjection , no , not for an hour ; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you .
But of these who seemed to be somewhat , ( whatsoever they were , it maketh no matter to me : God accepteth no man ' s person : ) for they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me .
But contrariwise , when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me , as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter .
( For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision , the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles : )
And when James , Cephas , and John , who seemed to be pillars , perceived the grace that was given unto me , they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship ; that we should go unto the heathen , and they unto the circumcision .
Only they would that we should remember the poor ; the same which I also was forward to do .
But when Peter was come to Antioch , I withstood him to the face , because he was to be blamed .
For before that certain came from James , he did eat with the Gentiles : but when they were come , he withdrew and separated himself , fearing them which were of the circumcision .
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him ; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation .
But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel , I said unto Peter before them all , If thou , being a Jew , livest after the manner of Gentiles , and not as do the Jews , why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews ?
We who are Jews by nature , and not sinners of the Gentiles .
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law , but by the faith of Jesus Christ , even we have believed in Jesus Christ , that we might be justified by the faith of Christ , and not by the works of the law : for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified .
But if , while we seek to be justified by Christ , we ourselves also are found sinners , is therefore Christ the minister of sin ? God forbid .
For if I build again the things which I destroyed , I make myself a transgressor .
For I through the law am dead to the law , that I might live unto God .
I am crucified with Christ : nevertheless I live ; yet not I , but Christ liveth in me : and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God , who loved me , and gave himself for me .
I do not frustrate the grace of God : for if righteousness come by the law , then Christ is dead in vain .
O foolish Galatians , who hath bewitched you , that ye should not obey the truth , before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth , crucified among you ?
This only would I learn of you , Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law , or by the hearing of faith ?
Are ye so foolish ? having begun in the Spirit , are ye now made perfect by the flesh ?
Have ye suffered so many things in vain ? if it be yet in vain .
He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit , and worketh miracles among you , doeth he it by the works of the law , or by the hearing of faith ?
Even as Abraham believed God , and it was accounted to him for righteousness .
Know ye therefore that they which are of faith , the same are the children of Abraham .
And the scripture , foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith , preached before the gospel unto Abraham , saying , In thee shall all nations be blessed .
So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham .
For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse : for it is written , Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them .
But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God , it is evident : for , The just shall live by faith .
And the law is not of faith : but , The man that doeth them shall live in them .
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law , being made a curse for us : for it is written , Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree .
That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith .
Brethren , I speak after the manner of men ; Though it be but a man ' s covenant , yet if it be confirmed , no man disannulleth , or addeth thereto .
Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made . He saith not , And to seeds , as of many ; but as of one , And to thy seed , which is Christ .
And this I say , that the covenant , that was confirmed before of God in Christ , the law , which was four hundred and thirty years after , cannot disannul , that it should make the promise of none effect .
For if the inheritance be of the law , it is no more of promise : but God gave it to Abraham by promise .
Wherefore then serveth the law ? It was added because of transgressions , till the seed should come to whom the promise was made ; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator .
Now a mediator is not a mediator of one , but God is one .
Is the law then against the promises of God ? God forbid : for if there had been a law given which could have given life , verily righteousness should have been by the law .
But the scripture hath concluded all under sin , that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe .
But before faith came , we were kept under the law , shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed .
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ , that we might be justified by faith .
But after that faith is come , we are no longer under a schoolmaster .
For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus .
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ .
There is neither Jew nor Greek , there is neither bond nor free , there is neither male nor female : for ye are all one in Christ Jesus .
And if ye be Christ ' s , then are ye Abraham ' s seed , and heirs according to the promise .
Now I say , That the heir , as long as he is a child , differeth nothing from a servant , though he be lord of all .
But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father .
Even so we , when we were children , were in bondage under the elements of the world .
But when the fulness of the time was come , God sent forth his Son , made of a woman , made under the law .
To redeem them that were under the law , that we might receive the adoption of sons .
And because ye are sons , God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts , crying , Abba , Father .
Wherefore thou art no more a servant , but a son ; and if a son , then an heir of God through Christ .
Howbeit then , when ye knew not God , ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods .
But now , after that ye have known God , or rather are known of God , how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements , whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage ?
Ye observe days , and months , and times , and years .
I am afraid of you , lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain .
Brethren , I beseech you , be as I am ; for I am as ye are : ye have not injured me at all .
Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first .
And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not , nor rejected ; but received me as an angel of God , even as Christ Jesus .
Where is then the blessedness ye spake of ? for I bear you record , that , if it had been possible , ye would have plucked out your own eyes , and have given them to me .
Am I therefore become your enemy , because I tell you the truth ?
They zealously affect you , but not well ; yea , they would exclude you , that ye might affect them .
But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing , and not only when I am present with you .
My little children , of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you .
I desire to be present with you now , and to change my voice ; for I stand in doubt of you .
Tell me , ye that desire to be under the law , do ye not hear the law ?
For it is written , that Abraham had two sons , the one by a bondmaid , the other by a freewoman .
But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh ; but he of the freewoman was by promise .
Which things are an allegory : for these are the two covenants ; the one from the mount Sinai , which gendereth to bondage , which is Agar .
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia , and answereth to Jerusalem which now is , and is in bondage with her children .
But Jerusalem which is above is free , which is the mother of us all .
For it is written , Rejoice , thou barren that bearest not ; break forth and cry , thou that travailest not : for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband .
Now we , brethren , as Isaac was , are the children of promise .
But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit , even so it is now .
Nevertheless what saith the scripture ? Cast out the bondwoman and her son : for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman .
So then , brethren , we are not children of the bondwoman , but of the free .
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free , and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage .
Behold , I Paul say unto you , that if ye be circumcised , Christ shall profit you nothing .
For I testify again to every man that is circumcised , that he is a debtor to do the whole law .
Christ is become of no effect unto you , whosoever of you are justified by the law ; ye are fallen from grace .
For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith .
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing , nor uncircumcision ; but faith which worketh by love .
Ye did run well ; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth ?
This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you .
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump .
I have confidence in you through the Lord , that ye will be none otherwise minded : but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment , whosoever he be .
And I , brethren , if I yet preach circumcision , why do I yet suffer persecution ? then is the offence of the cross ceased .
I would they were even cut off which trouble you .
For , brethren , ye have been called unto liberty ; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh , but by love serve one another .
For all the law is fulfilled in one word , even in this ; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself .
But if ye bite and devour one another , take heed that ye be not consumed one of another .
This I say then , Walk in the Spirit , and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh .
For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit , and the Spirit against the flesh : and these are contrary the one to the other : so that ye cannot do the things that ye would .
But if ye be led of the Spirit , ye are not under the law .
Now the works of the flesh are manifest , which are these ; Adultery , fornication , uncleanness , lasciviousness .
Idolatry , witchcraft , hatred , variance , emulations , wrath , strife , seditions , heresies .
Envyings , murders , drunkenness , revellings , and such like : of the which I tell you before , as I have also told you in time past , that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God .
But the fruit of the Spirit is love , joy , peace , longsuffering , gentleness , goodness , faith .
Meekness , temperance : against such there is no law .
And they that are Christ ' s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts .
If we live in the Spirit , let us also walk in the Spirit .
Let us not be desirous of vain glory , provoking one another , envying one another .
Brethren , if a man be overtaken in a fault , ye which are spiritual , restore such an one in the spirit of meekness ; considering thyself , lest thou also be tempted .
Bear ye one another ' s burdens , and so fulfil the law of Christ .
For if a man think himself to be something , when he is nothing , he deceiveth himself .
But let every man prove his own work , and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone , and not in another .
For every man shall bear his own burden .
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things .
Be not deceived ; God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man soweth , that shall he also reap .
For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting .
And let us not be weary in well doing : for in due season we shall reap , if we faint not .
As we have therefore opportunity , let us do good unto all men , especially unto them who are of the household of faith .
Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand .
As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh , they constrain you to be circumcised ; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ .
For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law ; but desire to have you circumcised , that they may glory in your flesh .
But God forbid that I should glory , save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ , by whom the world is crucified unto me , and I unto the world .
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing , nor uncircumcision , but a new creature .
And as many as walk according to this rule , peace be on them , and mercy , and upon the Israel of God .
From henceforth let no man trouble me : for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus .
Brethren , the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit . Amen .
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God , to the saints which are at Ephesus , and to the faithful in Christ Jesus .
Grace be to you , and peace , from God our Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ .
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ .
According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world , that we should be holy and without blame before him in love .
Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself , according to the good pleasure of his will .
To the praise of the glory of his grace , wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved .
In whom we have redemption through his blood , the forgiveness of sins , according to the riches of his grace .
Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence .
Having made known unto us the mystery of his will , according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself .
That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ , both which are in heaven , and which are on earth ; even in him .
In whom also we have obtained an inheritance , being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will .
That we should be to the praise of his glory , who first trusted in Christ .
In whom ye also trusted , after that ye heard the word of truth , the gospel of your salvation : in whom also after that ye believed , ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise .
Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession , unto the praise of his glory .
Wherefore I also , after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus , and love unto all the saints .
Cease not to give thanks for you , making mention of you in my prayers .
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father of glory , may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him .
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened ; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling , and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints .
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us - ward who believe , according to the working of his mighty power .
Which he wrought in Christ , when he raised him from the dead , and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places .
Far above all principality , and power , and might , and dominion , and every name that is named , not only in this world , but also in that which is to come .
And hath put all things under his feet , and gave him to be the head over all things to the church .
Which is his body , the fulness of him that filleth all in all .
And you hath he quickened , who were dead in trespasses and sins .
Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world , according to the prince of the power of the air , the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience .
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh , fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind ; and were by nature the children of wrath , even as others .
But God , who is rich in mercy , for his great love wherewith he loved us .
Even when we were dead in sins , hath quickened us together with Christ , ( by grace ye are saved ; )
And hath raised us up together , and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus .
That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus .
For by grace are ye saved through faith ; and that not of yourselves : it is the gift of God .
Not of works , lest any man should boast .
For we are his workmanship , created in Christ Jesus unto good works , which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them .
Wherefore remember , that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh , who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands .
That at that time ye were without Christ , being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel , and strangers from the covenants of promise , having no hope , and without God in the world .
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ .
For he is our peace , who hath made both one , and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us .
Having abolished in his flesh the enmity , even the law of commandments contained in ordinances ; for to make in himself of twain one new man , so making peace .
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross , having slain the enmity thereby .
And came and preached peace to you which were afar off , and to them that were nigh .
For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father .
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners , but fellowcitizens with the saints , and of the household of God .
And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets , Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone .
In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord .
In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit .
For this cause I Paul , the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles .
If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you - ward .
How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery ; ( as I wrote afore in few words .
Whereby , when ye read , ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ )
Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men , as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit .
That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs , and of the same body , and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel .
Whereof I was made a minister , according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his power .
Unto me , who am less than the least of all saints , is this grace given , that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ .
And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery , which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God , who created all things by Jesus Christ .
To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God .
According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord .
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him .
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you , which is your glory .
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named .
That he would grant you , according to the riches of his glory , to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man .
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith ; that ye , being rooted and grounded in love .
May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth , and length , and depth , and height .
And to know the love of Christ , which passeth knowledge , that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God .
Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think , according to the power that worketh in us .
Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages , world without end . Amen .
I therefore , the prisoner of the Lord , beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called .
With all lowliness and meekness , with longsuffering , forbearing one another in love .
Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace .
There is one body , and one Spirit , even as ye are called in one hope of your calling .
One Lord , one faith , one baptism .
One God and Father of all , who is above all , and through all , and in you all .
But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ .
Wherefore he saith , When he ascended up on high , he led captivity captive , and gave gifts unto men .
( Now that he ascended , what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth ?
He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens , that he might fill all things . )
And he gave some , apostles ; and some , prophets ; and some , evangelists ; and some , pastors and teachers .
For the perfecting of the saints , for the work of the ministry , for the edifying of the body of Christ .
Till we all come in the unity of the faith , and of the knowledge of the Son of God , unto a perfect man , unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ .
That we henceforth be no more children , tossed to and fro , and carried about with every wind of doctrine , by the sleight of men , and cunning craftiness , whereby they lie in wait to deceive .
But speaking the truth in love , may grow up into him in all things , which is the head , even Christ .
From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth , according to the effectual working in the measure of every part , maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love .
This I say therefore , and testify in the Lord , that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk , in the vanity of their mind .
Having the understanding darkened , being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them , because of the blindness of their heart .
Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness , to work all uncleanness with greediness .
But ye have not so learned Christ .
If so be that ye have heard him , and have been taught by him , as the truth is in Jesus .
That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man , which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts .
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind .
And that ye put on the new man , which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness .
Wherefore putting away lying , speak every man truth with his neighbour : for we are members one of another .
Be ye angry , and sin not : let not the sun go down upon your wrath .
Neither give place to the devil .
Let him that stole steal no more : but rather let him labour , working with his hands the thing which is good , that he may have to give to him that needeth .
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth , but that which is good to the use of edifying , that it may minister grace unto the hearers .
And grieve not the holy Spirit of God , whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption .
Let all bitterness , and wrath , and anger , and clamour , and evil speaking , be put away from you , with all malice .
And be ye kind one to another , tenderhearted , forgiving one another , even as God for Christ ' s sake hath forgiven you .
Be ye therefore followers of God , as dear children .
And walk in love , as Christ also hath loved us , and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour .
But fornication , and all uncleanness , or covetousness , let it not be once named among you , as becometh saints .
Neither filthiness , nor foolish talking , nor jesting , which are not convenient : but rather giving of thanks .
For this ye know , that no whoremonger , nor unclean person , nor covetous man , who is an idolater , hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God .
Let no man deceive you with vain words : for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience .
Be not ye therefore partakers with them .
For ye were sometimes darkness , but now are ye light in the Lord : walk as children of light .
( For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth ; )
Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord .
And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness , but rather reprove them .
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret .
But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light : for whatsoever doth make manifest is light .
Wherefore he saith , Awake thou that sleepest , and arise from the dead , and Christ shall give thee light .
See then that ye walk circumspectly , not as fools , but as wise .
Redeeming the time , because the days are evil .
Wherefore be ye not unwise , but understanding what the will of the Lord is .
And be not drunk with wine , wherein is excess ; but be filled with the Spirit .
Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord .
Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God .
Wives , submit yourselves unto your own husbands , as unto the Lord .
For the husband is the head of the wife , even as Christ is the head of the church : and he is the saviour of the body .
Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ , so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing .
Husbands , love your wives , even as Christ also loved the church , and gave himself for it .
That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word .
That he might present it to himself a glorious church , not having spot , or wrinkle , or any such thing ; but that it should be holy and without blemish .
So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies . He that loveth his wife loveth himself .
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh ; but nourisheth and cherisheth it , even as the Lord the church .
For we are members of his body , of his flesh , and of his bones .
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother , and shall be joined unto his wife , and they two shall be one flesh .
This is a great mystery : but I speak concerning Christ and the church .
Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself ; and the wife see that she reverence her husband .
Children , obey your parents in the Lord : for this is right .
Honour thy father and mother ; ( which is the first commandment with promise ; )
That it may be well with thee , and thou mayest live long on the earth .
And , ye fathers , provoke not your children to wrath : but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord .
Servants , be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh , with fear and trembling , in singleness of your heart , as unto Christ .
Not with eyeservice , as menpleasers ; but as the servants of Christ , doing the will of God from the heart .
With good will doing service , as to the Lord , and not to men .
Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth , the same shall he receive of the Lord , whether he be bond or free .
And , ye masters , do the same things unto them , forbearing threatening : knowing that your Master also is in heaven ; neither is there respect of persons with him .
Finally , my brethren , be strong in the Lord , and in the power of his might .
Put on the whole armour of God , that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil .
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood , but against principalities , against powers , against the rulers of the darkness of this world , against spiritual wickedness in high places .
Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God , that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day , and having done all , to stand .
Stand therefore , having your loins girt about with truth , and having on the breastplate of righteousness .
And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace .
Above all , taking the shield of faith , wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked .
And take the helmet of salvation , and the sword of the Spirit , which is the word of God .
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit , and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints .
And for me , that utterance may be given unto me , that I may open my mouth boldly , to make known the mystery of the gospel .
For which I am an ambassador in bonds : that therein I may speak boldly , as I ought to speak .
But that ye also may know my affairs , and how I do , Tychicus , a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord , shall make known to you all things .
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose , that ye might know our affairs , and that he might comfort your hearts .
Peace be to the brethren , and love with faith , from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity . Amen .
Paul and Timotheus , the servants of Jesus Christ , to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi , with the bishops and deacons .
Grace be unto you , and peace , from God our Father , and from the Lord Jesus Christ .
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you .
Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy .
For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now .
Being confident of this very thing , that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ .
Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all , because I have you in my heart ; inasmuch as both in my bonds , and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel , ye all are partakers of my grace .
For God is my record , how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ .
And this I pray , that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment .
That ye may approve things that are excellent ; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ .
Being filled with the fruits of righteousness , which are by Jesus Christ , unto the glory and praise of God .
But I would ye should understand , brethren , that the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel .
So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace , and in all other places .
And many of the brethren in the Lord , waxing confident by my bonds , are much more bold to speak the word without fear .
Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife ; and some also of good will .
The one preach Christ of contention , not sincerely , supposing to add affliction to my bonds .
But the other of love , knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel .
What then ? notwithstanding , every way , whether in pretence , or in truth , Christ is preached ; and I therein do rejoice , yea , and will rejoice .
For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer , and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ .
According to my earnest expectation and my hope , that in nothing I shall be ashamed , but that with all boldness , as always , so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body , whether it be by life , or by death .
For to me to live is Christ , and to die is gain .
But if I live in the flesh , this is the fruit of my labour : yet what I shall choose I wot not .
For I am in a strait betwixt two , having a desire to depart , and to be with Christ ; which is far better .
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you .
And having this confidence , I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith .
That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again .
Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ : that whether I come and see you , or else be absent , I may hear of your affairs , that ye stand fast in one spirit , with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel .
And in nothing terrified by your adversaries : which is to them an evident token of perdition , but to you of salvation , and that of God .
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ , not only to believe on him , but also to suffer for his sake .
Having the same conflict which ye saw in me , and now hear to be in me .
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ , if any comfort of love , if any fellowship of the Spirit , if any bowels and mercies .
Fulfil ye my joy , that ye be likeminded , having the same love , being of one accord , of one mind .
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory ; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves .
Look not every man on his own things , but every man also on the things of others .
Let this mind be in you , which was also in Christ Jesus .
Who , being in the form of God , thought it not robbery to be equal with God .
But made himself of no reputation , and took upon him the form of a servant , and was made in the likeness of men .
And being found in fashion as a man , he humbled himself , and became obedient unto death , even the death of the cross .
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him , and given him a name which is above every name .
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow , of things in heaven , and things in earth , and things under the earth .
And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord , to the glory of God the Father .
Wherefore , my beloved , as ye have always obeyed , not as in my presence only , but now much more in my absence , work out your own salvation with fear and trembling .
For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure .
Do all things without murmurings and disputings .
That ye may be blameless and harmless , the sons of God , without rebuke , in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation , among whom ye shine as lights in the world .
Holding forth the word of life ; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ , that I have not run in vain , neither laboured in vain .
Yea , and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith , I joy , and rejoice with you all .
For the same cause also do ye joy , and rejoice with me .
But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you , that I also may be of good comfort , when I know your state .
For I have no man likeminded , who will naturally care for your state .
For all seek their own , not the things which are Jesus Christ ' s .
But ye know the proof of him , that , as a son with the father , he hath served with me in the gospel .
Him therefore I hope to send presently , so soon as I shall see how it will go with me .
But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly .
Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus , my brother , and companion in labour , and fellowsoldier , but your messenger , and he that ministered to my wants .
For he longed after you all , and was full of heaviness , because that ye had heard that he had been sick .
For indeed he was sick nigh unto death : but God had mercy on him ; and not on him only , but on me also , lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow .
I sent him therefore the more carefully , that , when ye see him again , ye may rejoice , and that I may be the less sorrowful .
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness ; and hold such in reputation .
Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death , not regarding his life , to supply your lack of service toward me .
Finally , my brethren , rejoice in the Lord . To write the same things to you , to me indeed is not grievous , but for you it is safe .
Beware of dogs , beware of evil workers , beware of the concision .
For we are the circumcision , which worship God in the spirit , and rejoice in Christ Jesus , and have no confidence in the flesh .
Though I might also have confidence in the flesh . If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh , I more .
Circumcised the eighth day , of the stock of Israel , of the tribe of Benjamin , an Hebrew of the Hebrews ; as touching the law , a Pharisee .
Concerning zeal , persecuting the church ; touching the righteousness which is in the law , blameless .
But what things were gain to me , those I counted loss for Christ .
Yea doubtless , and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord : for whom I have suffered the loss of all things , and do count them but dung , that I may win Christ .
And be found in him , not having mine own righteousness , which is of the law , but that which is through the faith of Christ , the righteousness which is of God by faith .
That I may know him , and the power of his resurrection , and the fellowship of his sufferings , being made conformable unto his death .
If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead .
Not as though I had already attained , either were already perfect : but I follow after , if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus .
Brethren , I count not myself to have apprehended : but this one thing I do , forgetting those things which are behind , and reaching forth unto those things which are before .
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus .
Let us therefore , as many as be perfect , be thus minded : and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded , God shall reveal even this unto you .
Nevertheless , whereto we have already attained , let us walk by the same rule , let us mind the same thing .
Brethren , be followers together of me , and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample .
( For many walk , of whom I have told you often , and now tell you even weeping , that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ .
Whose end is destruction , whose God is their belly , and whose glory is in their shame , who mind earthly things . )
For our conversation is in heaven ; from whence also we look for the Saviour , the Lord Jesus Christ .
Who shall change our vile body , that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body , according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself .
Therefore , my brethren dearly beloved and longed for , my joy and crown , so stand fast in the Lord , my dearly beloved .
I beseech Euodias , and beseech Syntyche , that they be of the same mind in the Lord .
And I intreat thee also , true yokefellow , help those women which laboured with me in the gospel , with Clement also , and with other my fellowlabourers , whose names are in the book of life .
Rejoice in the Lord alway : and again I say , Rejoice .
Let your moderation be known unto all men . The Lord is at hand .
Be careful for nothing ; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God .
And the peace of God , which passeth all understanding , shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus .
Finally , brethren , whatsoever things are true , whatsoever things are honest , whatsoever things are just , whatsoever things are pure , whatsoever things are lovely , whatsoever things are of good report ; if there be any virtue , and if there be any praise , think on these things .
Those things , which ye have both learned , and received , and heard , and seen in me , do : and the God of peace shall be with you .
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly , that now at the last your care of me hath flourished again ; wherein ye were also careful , but ye lacked opportunity .
Not that I speak in respect of want : for I have learned , in whatsoever state I am , therewith to be content .
I know both how to be abased , and I know how to abound : every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry , both to abound and to suffer need .
I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me .
Notwithstanding ye have well done , that ye did communicate with my affliction .
Now ye Philippians know also , that in the beginning of the gospel , when I departed from Macedonia , no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving , but ye only .
For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity .
Not because I desire a gift : but I desire fruit that may abound to your account .
But I have all , and abound : I am full , having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you , an odour of a sweet smell , a sacrifice acceptable , wellpleasing to God .
But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus .
Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus . The brethren which are with me greet you .
All the saints salute you , chiefly they that are of Caesar ' s household .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all . Amen .
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God , and Timotheus our brother .
To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse : Grace be unto you , and peace , from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , praying always for you .
Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus , and of the love which ye have to all the saints .
For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven , whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel .
Which is come unto you , as it is in all the world ; and bringeth forth fruit , as it doth also in you , since the day ye heard of it , and knew the grace of God in truth .
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant , who is for you a faithful minister of Christ .
Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit .
For this cause we also , since the day we heard it , do not cease to pray for you , and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding .
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing , being fruitful in every good work , and increasing in the knowledge of God .
Strengthened with all might , according to his glorious power , unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness .
Giving thanks unto the Father , which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light .
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness , and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son .
In whom we have redemption through his blood , even the forgiveness of sins .
Who is the image of the invisible God , the firstborn of every creature .
For by him were all things created , that are in heaven , and that are in earth , visible and invisible , whether they be thrones , or dominions , or principalities , or powers : all things were created by him , and for him .
And he is before all things , and by him all things consist .
And he is the head of the body , the church : who is the beginning , the firstborn from the dead ; that in all things he might have the preeminence .
For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell .
And , having made peace through the blood of his cross , by him to reconcile all things unto himself ; by him , I say , whether they be things in earth , or things in heaven .
And you , that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works , yet now hath he reconciled
In the body of his flesh through death , to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight .
If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled , and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel , which ye have heard , and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven ; whereof I Paul am made a minister .
Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you , and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body ' s sake , which is the church .
Whereof I am made a minister , according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you , to fulfil the word of God .
Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations , but now is made manifest to his saints .
To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles ; which is Christ in you , the hope of glory .
Whom we preach , warning every man , and teaching every man in all wisdom ; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus .
Whereunto I also labour , striving according to his working , which worketh in me mightily .
For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you , and for them at Laodicea , and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh .
That their hearts might be comforted , being knit together in love , and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding , to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God , and of the Father , and of Christ .
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge .
And this I say , lest any man should beguile you with enticing words .
For though I be absent in the flesh , yet am I with you in the spirit , joying and beholding your order , and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ .
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord , so walk ye in him .
Rooted and built up in him , and stablished in the faith , as ye have been taught , abounding therein with thanksgiving .
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit , after the tradition of men , after the rudiments of the world , and not after Christ .
For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily .
And ye are complete in him , which is the head of all principality and power .
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands , in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ .
Buried with him in baptism , wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God , who hath raised him from the dead .
And you , being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh , hath he quickened together with him , having forgiven you all trespasses .
Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us , which was contrary to us , and took it out of the way , nailing it to his cross .
And having spoiled principalities and powers , he made a shew of them openly , triumphing over them in it .
Let no man therefore judge you in meat , or in drink , or in respect of an holyday , or of the new moon , or of the sabbath days .
Which are a shadow of things to come ; but the body is of Christ .
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels , intruding into those things which he hath not seen , vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind .
And not holding the Head , from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered , and knit together , increaseth with the increase of God .
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world , why , as though living in the world , are ye subject to ordinances .
( Touch not ; taste not ; handle not .
Which all are to perish with the using ; ) after the commandments and doctrines of men ?
Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship , and humility , and neglecting of the body ; not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh .
If ye then be risen with Christ , seek those things which are above , where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God .
Set your affection on things above , not on things on the earth .
For ye are dead , and your life is hid with Christ in God .
When Christ , who is our life , shall appear , then shall ye also appear with him in glory .
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth ; fornication , uncleanness , inordinate affection , evil concupiscence , and covetousness , which is idolatry .
For which things ' sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience .
In the which ye also walked some time , when ye lived in them .
But now ye also put off all these ; anger , wrath , malice , blasphemy , filthy communication out of your mouth .
Lie not one to another , seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds .
And have put on the new man , which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him .
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew , circumcision nor uncircumcision , Barbarian , Scythian , bond nor free : but Christ is all , and in all .
Put on therefore , as the elect of God , holy and beloved , bowels of mercies , kindness , humbleness of mind , meekness , longsuffering .
Forbearing one another , and forgiving one another , if any man have a quarrel against any : even as Christ forgave you , so also do ye .
And above all these things put on charity , which is the bond of perfectness .
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts , to the which also ye are called in one body ; and be ye thankful .
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom ; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord .
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed , do all in the name of the Lord Jesus , giving thanks to God and the Father by him .
Wives , submit yourselves unto your own husbands , as it is fit in the Lord .
Husbands , love your wives , and be not bitter against them .
Children , obey your parents in all things : for this is well pleasing unto the Lord .
Fathers , provoke not your children to anger , lest they be discouraged .
Servants , obey in all things your masters according to the flesh ; not with eyeservice , as menpleasers ; but in singleness of heart , fearing God .
And whatsoever ye do , do it heartily , as to the Lord , and not unto men .
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance : for ye serve the Lord Christ .
But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done : and there is no respect of persons .
Masters , give unto your servants that which is just and equal ; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven .
Continue in prayer , and watch in the same with thanksgiving .
Withal praying also for us , that God would open unto us a door of utterance , to speak the mystery of Christ , for which I am also in bonds .
That I may make it manifest , as I ought to speak .
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without , redeeming the time .
Let your speech be alway with grace , seasoned with salt , that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man .
All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you , who is a beloved brother , and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord .
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose , that he might know your estate , and comfort your hearts .
With Onesimus , a faithful and beloved brother , who is one of you . They shall make known unto you all things which are done here .
Aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you , and Marcus , sister ' s son to Barnabas , ( touching whom ye received commandments : if he come unto you , receive him ; )
And Jesus , which is called Justus , who are of the circumcision . These only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of God , which have been a comfort unto me .
Epaphras , who is one of you , a servant of Christ , saluteth you , always labouring fervently for you in prayers , that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God .
For I bear him record , that he hath a great zeal for you , and them that are in Laodicea , and them in Hierapolis .
Luke , the beloved physician , and Demas , greet you .
Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea , and Nymphas , and the church which is in his house .
And when this epistle is read among you , cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans ; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea .
And say to Archippus , Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord , that thou fulfil it .
The salutation by the hand of me Paul . Remember my bonds . Grace be with you . Amen .
Paul , and Silvanus , and Timotheus , unto the church of the Thessalonians which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ : Grace be unto you , and peace , from God our Father , and the Lord Jesus Christ .
We give thanks to God always for you all , making mention of you in our prayers .
Remembering without ceasing your work of faith , and labour of love , and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ , in the sight of God and our Father .
Knowing , brethren beloved , your election of God .
For our gospel came not unto you in word only , but also in power , and in the Holy Ghost , and in much assurance ; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake .
And ye became followers of us , and of the Lord , having received the word in much affliction , with joy of the Holy Ghost .
So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia .
For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia , but also in every place your faith to God - ward is spread abroad ; so that we need not to speak any thing .
For they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had unto you , and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God .
And to wait for his Son from heaven , whom he raised from the dead , even Jesus , which delivered us from the wrath to come .
For yourselves , brethren , know our entrance in unto you , that it was not in vain .
But even after that we had suffered before , and were shamefully entreated , as ye know , at Philippi , we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention .
For our exhortation was not of deceit , nor of uncleanness , nor in guile .
But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel , even so we speak ; not as pleasing men , but God , which trieth our hearts .
For neither at any time used we flattering words , as ye know , nor a cloke of covetousness ; God is witness .
Nor of men sought we glory , neither of you , nor yet of others , when we might have been burdensome , as the apostles of Christ .
But we were gentle among you , even as a nurse cherisheth her children .
So being affectionately desirous of you , we were willing to have imparted unto you , not the gospel of God only , but also our own souls , because ye were dear unto us .
For ye remember , brethren , our labour and travail : for labouring night and day , because we would not be chargeable unto any of you , we preached unto you the gospel of God .
Ye are witnesses , and God also , how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe .
As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you , as a father doth his children .
That ye would walk worthy of God , who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory .
For this cause also thank we God without ceasing , because , when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us , ye received it not as the word of men , but as it is in truth , the word of God , which effectually worketh also in you that believe .
For ye , brethren , became followers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus : for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen , even as they have of the Jews .
Who both killed the Lord Jesus , and their own prophets , and have persecuted us ; and they please not God , and are contrary to all men .
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved , to fill up their sins alway : for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost .
But we , brethren , being taken from you for a short time in presence , not in heart , endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire .
Wherefore we would have come unto you , even I Paul , once and again ; but Satan hindered us .
For what is our hope , or joy , or crown of rejoicing ? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming ?
For ye are our glory and joy .
Wherefore when we could no longer forbear , we thought it good to be left at Athens alone .
And sent Timotheus , our brother , and minister of God , and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ , to establish you , and to comfort you concerning your faith .
That no man should be moved by these afflictions : for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto .
For verily , when we were with you , we told you before that we should suffer tribulation ; even as it came to pass , and ye know .
For this cause , when I could no longer forbear , I sent to know your faith , lest by some means the tempter have tempted you , and our labour be in vain .
But now when Timotheus came from you unto us , and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity , and that ye have good remembrance of us always , desiring greatly to see us , as we also to see you .
Therefore , brethren , we were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your faith .
For now we live , if ye stand fast in the Lord .
For what thanks can we render to God again for you , for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God .
Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face , and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith ?
Now God himself and our Father , and our Lord Jesus Christ , direct our way unto you .
And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another , and toward all men , even as we do toward you .
To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God , even our Father , at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints .
Furthermore then we beseech you , brethren , and exhort you by the Lord Jesus , that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God , so ye would abound more and more .
For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus .
For this is the will of God , even your sanctification , that ye should abstain from fornication .
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour .
Not in the lust of concupiscence , even as the Gentiles which know not God .
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter : because that the Lord is the avenger of all such , as we also have forewarned you and testified .
For God hath not called us unto uncleanness , but unto holiness .
He therefore that despiseth , despiseth not man , but God , who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit .
But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you : for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another .
And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia : but we beseech you , brethren , that ye increase more and more .
And that ye study to be quiet , and to do your own business , and to work with your own hands , as we commanded you .
That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without , and that ye may have lack of nothing .
But I would not have you to be ignorant , brethren , concerning them which are asleep , that ye sorrow not , even as others which have no hope .
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again , even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him .
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord , that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep .
For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout , with the voice of the archangel , and with the trump of God : and the dead in Christ shall rise first .
Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds , to meet the Lord in the air : and so shall we ever be with the Lord .
Wherefore comfort one another with these words .
But of the times and the seasons , brethren , ye have no need that I write unto you .
For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night .
For when they shall say , Peace and safety ; then sudden destruction cometh upon them , as travail upon a woman with child ; and they shall not escape .
But ye , brethren , are not in darkness , that that day should overtake you as a thief .
Ye are all the children of light , and the children of the day : we are not of the night , nor of darkness .
Therefore let us not sleep , as do others ; but let us watch and be sober .
For they that sleep sleep in the night ; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night .
But let us , who are of the day , be sober , putting on the breastplate of faith and love ; and for an helmet , the hope of salvation .
For God hath not appointed us to wrath , but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ .
Who died for us , that , whether we wake or sleep , we should live together with him .
Wherefore comfort yourselves together , and edify one another , even as also ye do .
And we beseech you , brethren , to know them which labour among you , and are over you in the Lord , and admonish you .
And to esteem them very highly in love for their work ' s sake . And be at peace among yourselves .
Now we exhort you , brethren , warn them that are unruly , comfort the feebleminded , support the weak , be patient toward all men .
See that none render evil for evil unto any man ; but ever follow that which is good , both among yourselves , and to all men .
Rejoice evermore .
Pray without ceasing .
In every thing give thanks : for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you .
Quench not the Spirit .
Despise not prophesyings .
Prove all things ; hold fast that which is good .
Abstain from all appearance of evil .
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly ; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Faithful is he that calleth you , who also will do it .
Brethren , pray for us .
Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss .
I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you . Amen .
Paul , and Silvanus , and Timotheus , unto the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Grace unto you , and peace , from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
We are bound to thank God always for you , brethren , as it is meet , because that your faith groweth exceedingly , and the charity of every one of you all toward each other aboundeth .
So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure .
Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God , that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God , for which ye also suffer .
Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you .
And to you who are troubled rest with us , when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels .
In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God , and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord , and from the glory of his power .
When he shall come to be glorified in his saints , and to be admired in all them that believe ( because our testimony among you was believed ) in that day .
Wherefore also we pray always for you , that our God would count you worthy of this calling , and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness , and the work of faith with power .
That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you , and ye in him , according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ .
Now we beseech you , brethren , by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ , and by our gathering together unto him .
That ye be not soon shaken in mind , or be troubled , neither by spirit , nor by word , nor by letter as from us , as that the day of Christ is at hand .
Let no man deceive you by any means : for that day shall not come , except there come a falling away first , and that man of sin be revealed , the son of perdition .
Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God , or that is worshipped ; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God , shewing himself that he is God .
Remember ye not , that , when I was yet with you , I told you these things ?
And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time .
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work : only he who now letteth will let , until he be taken out of the way .
And then shall that Wicked be revealed , whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth , and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming .
Even him , whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders .
And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish ; because they received not the love of the truth , that they might be saved .
And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion , that they should believe a lie .
That they all might be damned who believed not the truth , but had pleasure in unrighteousness .
But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you , brethren beloved of the Lord , because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth .
Whereunto he called you by our gospel , to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Therefore , brethren , stand fast , and hold the traditions which ye have been taught , whether by word , or our epistle .
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself , and God , even our Father , which hath loved us , and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace .
Comfort your hearts , and stablish you in every good word and work .
Finally , brethren , pray for us , that the word of the Lord may have free course , and be glorified , even as it is with you .
And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men : for all men have not faith .
But the Lord is faithful , who shall stablish you , and keep you from evil .
And we have confidence in the Lord touching you , that ye both do and will do the things which we command you .
And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God , and into the patient waiting for Christ .
Now we command you , brethren , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly , and not after the tradition which he received of us .
For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us : for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you .
Neither did we eat any man ' s bread for nought ; but wrought with labour and travail night and day , that we might not be chargeable to any of you .
Not because we have not power , but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us .
For even when we were with you , this we commanded you , that if any would not work , neither should he eat .
For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly , working not at all , but are busybodies .
Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ , that with quietness they work , and eat their own bread .
But ye , brethren , be not weary in well doing .
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle , note that man , and have no company with him , that he may be ashamed .
Yet count him not as an enemy , but admonish him as a brother .
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means . The Lord be with you all .
The salutation of Paul with mine own hand , which is the token in every epistle : so I write .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all . Amen .
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Saviour , and Lord Jesus Christ , which is our hope .
Unto Timothy , my own son in the faith : Grace , mercy , and peace , from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord .
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus , when I went into Macedonia , that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other doctrine .
Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies , which minister questions , rather than godly edifying which is in faith : so do .
Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart , and of a good conscience , and of faith unfeigned .
From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling .
Desiring to be teachers of the law ; understanding neither what they say , nor whereof they affirm .
But we know that the law is good , if a man use it lawfully .
Knowing this , that the law is not made for a righteous man , but for the lawless and disobedient , for the ungodly and for sinners , for unholy and profane , for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers , for manslayers .
For whoremongers , for them that defile themselves with mankind , for menstealers , for liars , for perjured persons , and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine .
According to the glorious gospel of the blessed God , which was committed to my trust .
And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord , who hath enabled me , for that he counted me faithful , putting me into the ministry .
Who was before a blasphemer , and a persecutor , and injurious : but I obtained mercy , because I did it ignorantly in unbelief .
And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus .
This is a faithful saying , and worthy of all acceptation , that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ; of whom I am chief .
Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy , that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all longsuffering , for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting .
Now unto the King eternal , immortal , invisible , the only wise God , be honour and glory for ever and ever . Amen .
This charge I commit unto thee , son Timothy , according to the prophecies which went before on thee , that thou by them mightest war a good warfare .
Holding faith , and a good conscience ; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck .
Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander ; whom I have delivered unto Satan , that they may learn not to blaspheme .
I exhort therefore , that , first of all , supplications , prayers , intercessions , and giving of thanks , be made for all men .
For kings , and for all that are in authority ; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty .
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour .
Who will have all men to be saved , and to come unto the knowledge of the truth .
For there is one God , and one mediator between God and men , the man Christ Jesus .
Who gave himself a ransom for all , to be testified in due time .
Whereunto I am ordained a preacher , and an apostle , ( I speak the truth in Christ , and lie not ; ) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity .
I will therefore that men pray every where , lifting up holy hands , without wrath and doubting .
In like manner also , that women adorn themselves in modest apparel , with shamefacedness and sobriety ; not with broided hair , or gold , or pearls , or costly array .
But ( which becometh women professing godliness ) with good works .
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection .
But I suffer not a woman to teach , nor to usurp authority over the man , but to be in silence .
For Adam was first formed , then Eve .
And Adam was not deceived , but the woman being deceived was in the transgression .
Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing , if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety .
This is a true saying , If a man desire the office of a bishop , he desireth a good work .
A bishop then must be blameless , the husband of one wife , vigilant , sober , of good behaviour , given to hospitality , apt to teach .
Not given to wine , no striker , not greedy of filthy lucre ; but patient , not a brawler , not covetous .
One that ruleth well his own house , having his children in subjection with all gravity .
( For if a man know not how to rule his own house , how shall he take care of the church of God ? )
Not a novice , lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil .
Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without ; lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil .
Likewise must the deacons be grave , not doubletongued , not given to much wine , not greedy of filthy lucre .
Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience .
And let these also first be proved ; then let them use the office of a deacon , being found blameless .
Even so must their wives be grave , not slanderers , sober , faithful in all things .
Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife , ruling their children and their own houses well .
For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree , and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus .
These things write I unto thee , hoping to come unto thee shortly .
But if I tarry long , that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God , which is the church of the living God , the pillar and ground of the truth .
And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness : God was manifest in the flesh , justified in the Spirit , seen of angels , preached unto the Gentiles , believed on in the world , received up into glory .
Now the Spirit speaketh expressly , that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith , giving heed to seducing spirits , and doctrines of devils .
Speaking lies in hypocrisy ; having their conscience seared with a hot iron .
Forbidding to marry , and commanding to abstain from meats , which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth .
For every creature of God is good , and nothing to be refused , if it be received with thanksgiving .
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer .
If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things , thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ , nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine , whereunto thou hast attained .
But refuse profane and old wives ' fables , and exercise thyself rather unto godliness .
For bodily exercise profiteth little : but godliness is profitable unto all things , having promise of the life that now is , and of that which is to come .
This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation .
For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach , because we trust in the living God , who is the Saviour of all men , specially of those that believe .
These things command and teach .
Let no man despise thy youth ; but be thou an example of the believers , in word , in conversation , in charity , in spirit , in faith , in purity .
Till I come , give attendance to reading , to exhortation , to doctrine .
Neglect not the gift that is in thee , which was given thee by prophecy , with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery .
Meditate upon these things ; give thyself wholly to them ; that thy profiting may appear to all .
Take heed unto thyself , and unto the doctrine ; continue in them : for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself , and them that hear thee .
Rebuke not an elder , but intreat him as a father ; and the younger men as brethren .
The elder women as mothers ; the younger as sisters , with all purity .
Honour widows that are widows indeed .
But if any widow have children or nephews , let them learn first to shew piety at home , and to requite their parents : for that is good and acceptable before God .
Now she that is a widow indeed , and desolate , trusteth in God , and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day .
But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth .
And these things give in charge , that they may be blameless .
But if any provide not for his own , and specially for those of his own house , he hath denied the faith , and is worse than an infidel .
Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old , having been the wife of one man .
Well reported of for good works ; if she have brought up children , if she have lodged strangers , if she have washed the saints ' feet , if she have relieved the afflicted , if she have diligently followed every good work .
But the younger widows refuse : for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ , they will marry .
Having damnation , because they have cast off their first faith .
And withal they learn to be idle , wandering about from house to house ; and not only idle , but tattlers also and busybodies , speaking things which they ought not .
I will therefore that the younger women marry , bear children , guide the house , give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully .
For some are already turned aside after Satan .
If any man or woman that believeth have widows , let them relieve them , and let not the church be charged ; that it may relieve them that are widows indeed .
Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour , especially they who labour in the word and doctrine .
For the scripture saith , Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn . And , The labourer is worthy of his reward .
Against an elder receive not an accusation , but before two or three witnesses .
Them that sin rebuke before all , that others also may fear .
I charge thee before God , and the Lord Jesus Christ , and the elect angels , that thou observe these things without preferring one before another , doing nothing by partiality .
Lay hands suddenly on no man , neither be partaker of other men ' s sins : keep thyself pure .
Drink no longer water , but use a little wine for thy stomach ' s sake and thine often infirmities .
Some men ' s sins are open beforehand , going before to judgment ; and some men they follow after .
Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand ; and they that are otherwise cannot be hid .
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour , that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed .
And they that have believing masters , let them not despise them , because they are brethren ; but rather do them service , because they are faithful and beloved , partakers of the benefit . These things teach and exhort .
If any man teach otherwise , and consent not to wholesome words , even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ , and to the doctrine which is according to godliness .
He is proud , knowing nothing , but doting about questions and strifes of words , whereof cometh envy , strife , railings , evil surmisings .
Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds , and destitute of the truth , supposing that gain is godliness : from such withdraw thyself .
But godliness with contentment is great gain .
For we brought nothing into this world , and it is certain we can carry nothing out .
And having food and raiment let us be therewith content .
But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare , and into many foolish and hurtful lusts , which drown men in destruction and perdition .
For the love of money is the root of all evil : which while some coveted after , they have erred from the faith , and pierced themselves through with many sorrows .
But thou , O man of God , flee these things ; and follow after righteousness , godliness , faith , love , patience , meekness .
Fight the good fight of faith , lay hold on eternal life , whereunto thou art also called , and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses .
I give thee charge in the sight of God , who quickeneth all things , and before Christ Jesus , who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession .
That thou keep this commandment without spot , unrebukeable , until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ .
Which in his times he shall shew , who is the blessed and only Potentate , the King of kings , and Lord of lords .
Who only hath immortality , dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto ; whom no man hath seen , nor can see : to whom be honour and power everlasting . Amen .
Charge them that are rich in this world , that they be not highminded , nor trust in uncertain riches , but in the living God , who giveth us richly all things to enjoy .
That they do good , that they be rich in good works , ready to distribute , willing to communicate .
Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come , that they may lay hold on eternal life .
O Timothy , keep that which is committed to thy trust , avoiding profane and vain babblings , and oppositions of science falsely so called .
Which some professing have erred concerning the faith . Grace be with thee . Amen .
Paul , an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God , according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus .
To Timothy , my dearly beloved son : Grace , mercy , and peace , from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord .
I thank God , whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience , that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day .
Greatly desiring to see thee , being mindful of thy tears , that I may be filled with joy .
When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee , which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois , and thy mother Eunice ; and I am persuaded that in thee also .
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God , which is in thee by the putting on of my hands .
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear ; but of power , and of love , and of a sound mind .
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord , nor of me his prisoner : but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God .
Who hath saved us , and called us with an holy calling , not according to our works , but according to his own purpose and grace , which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began .
But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ , who hath abolished death , and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel .
Whereunto I am appointed a preacher , and an apostle , and a teacher of the Gentiles .
For the which cause I also suffer these things : nevertheless I am not ashamed : for I know whom I have believed , and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day .
Hold fast the form of sound words , which thou hast heard of me , in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus .
That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us .
This thou knowest , that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me ; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes .
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus ; for he oft refreshed me , and was not ashamed of my chain .
But , when he was in Rome , he sought me out very diligently , and found me .
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day : and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus , thou knowest very well .
Thou therefore , my son , be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus .
And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses , the same commit thou to faithful men , who shall be able to teach others also .
Thou therefore endure hardness , as a good soldier of Jesus Christ .
No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life ; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier .
And if a man also strive for masteries , yet is he not crowned , except he strive lawfully .
The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits .
Consider what I say ; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things .
Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel .
Wherein I suffer trouble , as an evil doer , even unto bonds ; but the word of God is not bound .
Therefore I endure all things for the elect ' s sakes , that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory .
It is a faithful saying : For if we be dead with him , we shall also live with him .
If we suffer , we shall also reign with him : if we deny him , he also will deny us .
If we believe not , yet he abideth faithful : he cannot deny himself .
Of these things put them in remembrance , charging them before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit , but to the subverting of the hearers .
Study to shew thyself approved unto God , a workman that needeth not to be ashamed , rightly dividing the word of truth .
But shun profane and vain babblings : for they will increase unto more ungodliness .
And their word will eat as doth a canker : of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus .
Who concerning the truth have erred , saying that the resurrection is past already ; and overthrow the faith of some .
Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure , having this seal , The Lord knoweth them that are his . And , Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity .
But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver , but also of wood and of earth ; and some to honour , and some to dishonour .
If a man therefore purge himself from these , he shall be a vessel unto honour , sanctified , and meet for the master ' s use , and prepared unto every good work .
Flee also youthful lusts : but follow righteousness , faith , charity , peace , with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart .
But foolish and unlearned questions avoid , knowing that they do gender strifes .
And the servant of the Lord must not strive ; but be gentle unto all men , apt to teach , patient .
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves ; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth .
And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil , who are taken captive by him at his will .
This know also , that in the last days perilous times shall come .
For men shall be lovers of their own selves , covetous , boasters , proud , blasphemers , disobedient to parents , unthankful , unholy .
Without natural affection , trucebreakers , false accusers , incontinent , fierce , despisers of those that are good .
Traitors , heady , highminded , lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God .
Having a form of godliness , but denying the power thereof : from such turn away .
For of this sort are they which creep into houses , and lead captive silly women laden with sins , led away with divers lusts .
Ever learning , and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth .
Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses , so do these also resist the truth : men of corrupt minds , reprobate concerning the faith .
But they shall proceed no further : for their folly shall be manifest unto all men , as theirs also was .
But thou hast fully known my doctrine , manner of life , purpose , faith , longsuffering , charity , patience .
Persecutions , afflictions , which came unto me at Antioch , at Iconium , at Lystra ; what persecutions I endured : but out of them all the Lord delivered me .
Yea , and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution .
But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse , deceiving , and being deceived .
But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of , knowing of whom thou hast learned them .
And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures , which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus .
All scripture is given by inspiration of God , and is profitable for doctrine , for reproof , for correction , for instruction in righteousness .
That the man of God may be perfect , throughly furnished unto all good works .
I charge thee therefore before God , and the Lord Jesus Christ , who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom .
Preach the word ; be instant in season , out of season ; reprove , rebuke , exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine .
For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine ; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers , having itching ears .
And they shall turn away their ears from the truth , and shall be turned unto fables .
But watch thou in all things , endure afflictions , do the work of an evangelist , make full proof of thy ministry .
For I am now ready to be offered , and the time of my departure is at hand .
I have fought a good fight , I have finished my course , I have kept the faith .
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness , which the Lord , the righteous judge , shall give me at that day : and not to me only , but unto all them also that love his appearing .
Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me .
For Demas hath forsaken me , having loved this present world , and is departed unto Thessalonica ; Crescens to Galatia , Titus unto Dalmatia .
Only Luke is with me . Take Mark , and bring him with thee : for he is profitable to me for the ministry .
And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus .
The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus , when thou comest , bring with thee , and the books , but especially the parchments .
Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil : the Lord reward him according to his works .
Of whom be thou ware also ; for he hath greatly withstood our words .
At my first answer no man stood with me , but all men forsook me : I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge .
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me , and strengthened me ; that by me the preaching might be fully known , and that all the Gentiles might hear : and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion .
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work , and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom : to whom be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
Salute Prisca and Aquila , and the household of Onesiphorus .
Erastus abode at Corinth : but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick .
Do thy diligence to come before winter . Eubulus greeteth thee , and Pudens , and Linus , and Claudia , and all the brethren .
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit . Grace be with you . Amen .
Paul , a servant of God , and an apostle of Jesus Christ , according to the faith of God ' s elect , and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness .
In hope of eternal life , which God , that cannot lie , promised before the world began .
But hath in due times manifested his word through preaching , which is committed unto me according to the commandment of God our Saviour .
To Titus , mine own son after the common faith : Grace , mercy , and peace , from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour .
For this cause left I thee in Crete , that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting , and ordain elders in every city , as I had appointed thee .
If any be blameless , the husband of one wife , having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly .
For a bishop must be blameless , as the steward of God ; not selfwilled , not soon angry , not given to wine , no striker , not given to filthy lucre .
But a lover of hospitality , a lover of good men , sober , just , holy , temperate .
Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught , that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers .
For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers , specially they of the circumcision .
Whose mouths must be stopped , who subvert whole houses , teaching things which they ought not , for filthy lucre ' s sake .
One of themselves , even a prophet of their own , said , The Cretians are alway liars , evil beasts , slow bellies .
This witness is true . Wherefore rebuke them sharply , that they may be sound in the faith .
Not giving heed to Jewish fables , and commandments of men , that turn from the truth .
Unto the pure all things are pure : but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure ; but even their mind and conscience is defiled .
They profess that they know God ; but in works they deny him , being abominable , and disobedient , and unto every good work reprobate .
But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine .
That the aged men be sober , grave , temperate , sound in faith , in charity , in patience .
The aged women likewise , that they be in behaviour as becometh holiness , not false accusers , not given to much wine , teachers of good things .
That they may teach the young women to be sober , to love their husbands , to love their children .
To be discreet , chaste , keepers at home , good , obedient to their own husbands , that the word of God be not blasphemed .
Young men likewise exhort to be sober minded .
In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works : in doctrine shewing uncorruptness , gravity , sincerity .
Sound speech , that cannot be condemned ; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed , having no evil thing to say of you .
Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters , and to please them well in all things ; not answering again .
Not purloining , but shewing all good fidelity ; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things .
For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men .
Teaching us that , denying ungodliness and worldly lusts , we should live soberly , righteously , and godly , in this present world .
Looking for that blessed hope , and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ .
Who gave himself for us , that he might redeem us from all iniquity , and purify unto himself a peculiar people , zealous of good works .
These things speak , and exhort , and rebuke with all authority . Let no man despise thee .
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers , to obey magistrates , to be ready to every good work .
To speak evil of no man , to be no brawlers , but gentle , shewing all meekness unto all men .
For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish , disobedient , deceived , serving divers lusts and pleasures , living in malice and envy , hateful , and hating one another .
But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared .
Not by works of righteousness which we have done , but according to his mercy he saved us , by the washing of regeneration , and renewing of the Holy Ghost .
Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour .
That being justified by his grace , we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life .
This is a faithful saying , and these things I will that thou affirm constantly , that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works . These things are good and profitable unto men .
But avoid foolish questions , and genealogies , and contentions , and strivings about the law ; for they are unprofitable and vain .
A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition reject .
Knowing that he that is such is subverted , and sinneth , being condemned of himself .
When I shall send Artemas unto thee , or Tychicus , be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis : for I have determined there to winter .
Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently , that nothing be wanting unto them .
And let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses , that they be not unfruitful .
All that are with me salute thee . Greet them that love us in the faith . Grace be with you all . Amen .
Paul , a prisoner of Jesus Christ , and Timothy our brother , unto Philemon our dearly beloved , and fellowlabourer .
And to our beloved Apphia , and Archippus our fellowsoldier , and to the church in thy house .
Grace to you , and peace , from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ .
I thank my God , making mention of thee always in my prayers .
Hearing of thy love and faith , which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus , and toward all saints .
That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus .
For we have great joy and consolation in thy love , because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee , brother .
Wherefore , though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient .
Yet for love ' s sake I rather beseech thee , being such an one as Paul the aged , and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ .
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus , whom I have begotten in my bonds .
Which in time past was to thee unprofitable , but now profitable to thee and to me .
Whom I have sent again : thou therefore receive him , that is , mine own bowels .
Whom I would have retained with me , that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel .
But without thy mind would I do nothing ; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity , but willingly .
For perhaps he therefore departed for a season , that thou shouldest receive him for ever .
Not now as a servant , but above a servant , a brother beloved , specially to me , but how much more unto thee , both in the flesh , and in the Lord ?
If thou count me therefore a partner , receive him as myself .
If he hath wronged thee , or oweth thee ought , put that on mine account .
I Paul have written it with mine own hand , I will repay it : albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides .
Yea , brother , let me have joy of thee in the Lord : refresh my bowels in the Lord .
Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee , knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say .
But withal prepare me also a lodging : for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you .
There salute thee Epaphras , my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus .
Marcus , Aristarchus , Demas , Lucas , my fellowlabourers .
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit . Amen .
God , who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets .
Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son , whom he hath appointed heir of all things , by whom also he made the worlds .
Who being the brightness of his glory , and the express image of his person , and upholding all things by the word of his power , when he had by himself purged our sins , sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high .
Being made so much better than the angels , as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they .
For unto which of the angels said he at any time , Thou art my Son , this day have I begotten thee ? And again , I will be to him a Father , and he shall be to me a Son ?
And again , when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world , he saith , And let all the angels of God worship him .
And of the angels he saith , Who maketh his angels spirits , and his ministers a flame of fire .
But unto the Son he saith , Thy throne , O God , is for ever and ever : a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom .
Thou hast loved righteousness , and hated iniquity ; therefore God , even thy God , hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows .
And , Thou , Lord , in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth ; and the heavens are the works of thine hands .
They shall perish ; but thou remainest ; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment .
And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up , and they shall be changed : but thou art the same , and thy years shall not fail .
But to which of the angels said he at any time , Sit on my right hand , until I make thine enemies thy footstool ?
Are they not all ministering spirits , sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation ?
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard , lest at any time we should let them slip .
For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast , and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward .
How shall we escape , if we neglect so great salvation ; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord , and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him .
God also bearing them witness , both with signs and wonders , and with divers miracles , and gifts of the Holy Ghost , according to his own will ?
For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come , whereof we speak .
But one in a certain place testified , saying , What is man , that thou art mindful of him ? or the son of man , that thou visitest him ?
Thou madest him a little lower than the angels ; thou crownedst him with glory and honour , and didst set him over the works of thy hands .
Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet . For in that he put all in subjection under him , he left nothing that is not put under him . But now we see not yet all things put under him .
But we see Jesus , who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death , crowned with glory and honour ; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man .
For it became him , for whom are all things , and by whom are all things , in bringing many sons unto glory , to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings .
For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one : for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren .
Saying , I will declare thy name unto my brethren , in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee .
And again , I will put my trust in him . And again , Behold I and the children which God hath given me .
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood , he also himself likewise took part of the same ; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death , that is , the devil .
And deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage .
For verily he took not on him the nature of angels ; but he took on him the seed of Abraham .
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren , that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God , to make reconciliation for the sins of the people .
For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted , he is able to succour them that are tempted .
Wherefore , holy brethren , partakers of the heavenly calling , consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession , Christ Jesus .
Who was faithful to him that appointed him , as also Moses was faithful in all his house .
For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses , inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house .
For every house is builded by some man ; but he that built all things is God .
And Moses verily was faithful in all his house , as a servant , for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after .
But Christ as a son over his own house ; whose house are we , if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end .
Wherefore ( as the Holy Ghost saith , To day if ye will hear his voice .
Harden not your hearts , as in the provocation , in the day of temptation in the wilderness .
When your fathers tempted me , proved me , and saw my works forty years .
Wherefore I was grieved with that generation , and said , They do alway err in their heart ; and they have not known my ways .
So I sware in my wrath , They shall not enter into my rest . )
Take heed , brethren , lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief , in departing from the living God .
But exhort one another daily , while it is called To day ; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin .
For we are made partakers of Christ , if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end .
While it is said , To day if ye will hear his voice , harden not your hearts , as in the provocation .
For some , when they had heard , did provoke : howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses .
But with whom was he grieved forty years ? was it not with them that had sinned , whose carcases fell in the wilderness ?
And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest , but to them that believed not ?
So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief .
Let us therefore fear , lest , a promise being left us of entering into his rest , any of you should seem to come short of it .
For unto us was the gospel preached , as well as unto them : but the word preached did not profit them , not being mixed with faith in them that heard it .
For we which have believed do enter into rest , as he said , As I have sworn in my wrath , if they shall enter into my rest : although the works were finished from the foundation of the world .
For he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise , And God did rest the seventh day from all his works .
And in this place again , If they shall enter into my rest .
Seeing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein , and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief .
Again , he limiteth a certain day , saying in David , To day , after so long a time ; as it is said , To day if ye will hear his voice , harden not your hearts .
For if Jesus had given them rest , then would he not afterward have spoken of another day .
There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God .
For he that is entered into his rest , he also hath ceased from his own works , as God did from his .
Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest , lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief .
For the word of God is quick , and powerful , and sharper than any twoedged sword , piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit , and of the joints and marrow , and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart .
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight : but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do .
Seeing then that we have a great high priest , that is passed into the heavens , Jesus the Son of God , let us hold fast our profession .
For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all points tempted like as we are , yet without sin .
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace , that we may obtain mercy , and find grace to help in time of need .
For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God , that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins .
Who can have compassion on the ignorant , and on them that are out of the way ; for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity .
And by reason hereof he ought , as for the people , so also for himself , to offer for sins .
And no man taketh this honour unto himself , but he that is called of God , as was Aaron .
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest ; but he that said unto him , Thou art my Son , to day have I begotten thee .
As he saith also in another place , Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec .
Who in the days of his flesh , when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death , and was heard in that he feared .
Though he were a Son , yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered .
And being made perfect , he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him .
Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec .
Of whom we have many things to say , and hard to be uttered , seeing ye are dull of hearing .
For when for the time ye ought to be teachers , ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God ; and are become such as have need of milk , and not of strong meat .
For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness : for he is a babe .
But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age , even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil .
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ , let us go on unto perfection ; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works , and of faith toward God .
Of the doctrine of baptisms , and of laying on of hands , and of resurrection of the dead , and of eternal judgment .
And this will we do , if God permit .
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened , and have tasted of the heavenly gift , and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost .
And have tasted the good word of God , and the powers of the world to come .
If they shall fall away , to renew them again unto repentance ; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh , and put him to an open shame .
For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it , and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed , receiveth blessing from God .
But that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected , and is nigh unto cursing ; whose end is to be burned .
But , beloved , we are persuaded better things of you , and things that accompany salvation , though we thus speak .
For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love , which ye have shewed toward his name , in that ye have ministered to the saints , and do minister .
And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end .
That ye be not slothful , but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises .
For when God made promise to Abraham , because he could swear by no greater , he sware by himself .
Saying , Surely blessing I will bless thee , and multiplying I will multiply thee .
And so , after he had patiently endured , he obtained the promise .
For men verily swear by the greater : and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife .
Wherein God , willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel , confirmed it by an oath .
That by two immutable things , in which it was impossible for God to lie , we might have a strong consolation , who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us .
Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul , both sure and stedfast , and which entereth into that within the veil .
Whither the forerunner is for us entered , even Jesus , made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec .
For this Melchisedec , king of Salem , priest of the most high God , who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings , and blessed him .
To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all ; first being by interpretation King of righteousness , and after that also King of Salem , which is , King of peace .
Without father , without mother , without descent , having neither beginning of days , nor end of life ; but made like unto the Son of God ; abideth a priest continually .
Now consider how great this man was , unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils .
And verily they that are of the sons of Levi , who receive the office of the priesthood , have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law , that is , of their brethren , though they come out of the loins of Abraham .
But he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes of Abraham , and blessed him that had the promises .
And without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better .
And here men that die receive tithes ; but there he receiveth them , of whom it is witnessed that he liveth .
And as I may so say , Levi also , who receiveth tithes , payed tithes in Abraham .
For he was yet in the loins of his father , when Melchisedec met him .
If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood , ( for under it the people received the law , ) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec , and not be called after the order of Aaron ?
For the priesthood being changed , there is made of necessity a change also of the law .
For he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe , of which no man gave attendance at the altar .
For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda ; of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood .
And it is yet far more evident : for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest .
Who is made , not after the law of a carnal commandment , but after the power of an endless life .
For he testifieth , Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec .
For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof .
For the law made nothing perfect , but the bringing in of a better hope did ; by the which we draw nigh unto God .
And inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest .
( For those priests were made without an oath ; but this with an oath by him that said unto him , The Lord sware and will not repent , Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec : )
By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament .
And they truly were many priests , because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death .
But this man , because he continueth ever , hath an unchangeable priesthood .
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him , seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them .
For such an high priest became us , who is holy , harmless , undefiled , separate from sinners , and made higher than the heavens .
Who needeth not daily , as those high priests , to offer up sacrifice , first for his own sins , and then for the people ' s : for this he did once , when he offered up himself .
For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity ; but the word of the oath , which was since the law , maketh the Son , who is consecrated for evermore .
Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum : We have such an high priest , who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens .
A minister of the sanctuary , and of the true tabernacle , which the Lord pitched , and not man .
For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices : wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer .
For if he were on earth , he should not be a priest , seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law .
Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things , as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle : for , See , saith he , that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount .
But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry , by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant , which was established upon better promises .
For if that first covenant had been faultless , then should no place have been sought for the second .
For finding fault with them , he saith , Behold , the days come , saith the Lord , when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah .
Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt ; because they continued not in my covenant , and I regarded them not , saith the Lord .
For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days , saith the Lord ; I will put my laws into their mind , and write them in their hearts : and I will be to them a God , and they shall be to me a people .
And they shall not teach every man his neighbour , and every man his brother , saying , Know the Lord : for all shall know me , from the least to the greatest .
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness , and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more .
In that he saith , A new covenant , he hath made the first old . Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away .
Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service , and a worldly sanctuary .
For there was a tabernacle made ; the first , wherein was the candlestick , and the table , and the shewbread ; which is called the sanctuary .
And after the second veil , the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all .
Which had the golden censer , and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold , wherein was the golden pot that had manna , and Aaron ' s rod that budded , and the tables of the covenant .
And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat ; of which we cannot now speak particularly .
Now when these things were thus ordained , the priests went always into the first tabernacle , accomplishing the service of God .
But into the second went the high priest alone once every year , not without blood , which he offered for himself , and for the errors of the people .
The Holy Ghost this signifying , that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest , while as the first tabernacle was yet standing .
Which was a figure for the time then present , in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices , that could not make him that did the service perfect , as pertaining to the conscience .
Which stood only in meats and drinks , and divers washings , and carnal ordinances , imposed on them until the time of reformation .
But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come , by a greater and more perfect tabernacle , not made with hands , that is to say , not of this building .
Neither by the blood of goats and calves , but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place , having obtained eternal redemption for us .
For if the blood of bulls and of goats , and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean , sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh .
How much more shall the blood of Christ , who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God , purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God ?
And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament , that by means of death , for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament , they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance .
For where a testament is , there must also of necessity be the death of the testator .
For a testament is of force after men are dead : otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth .
Whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated without blood .
For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law , he took the blood of calves and of goats , with water , and scarlet wool , and hyssop , and sprinkled both the book , and all the people .
Saying , This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you .
Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle , and all the vessels of the ministry .
And almost all things are by the law purged with blood ; and without shedding of blood is no remission .
It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these ; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these .
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands , which are the figures of the true ; but into heaven itself , now to appear in the presence of God for us .
Nor yet that he should offer himself often , as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others .
For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world : but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself .
And as it is appointed unto men once to die , but after this the judgment .
So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many ; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation .
For the law having a shadow of good things to come , and not the very image of the things , can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect .
For then would they not have ceased to be offered ? because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins .
But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every year .
For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins .
Wherefore when he cometh into the world , he saith , Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not , but a body hast thou prepared me .
In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure .
Then said I , Lo , I come ( in the volume of the book it is written of me , ) to do thy will , O God .
Above when he said , Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and offering for sin thou wouldest not , neither hadst pleasure therein ; which are offered by the law .
Then said he , Lo , I come to do thy will , O God . He taketh away the first , that he may establish the second .
By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all .
And every priest standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices , which can never take away sins .
But this man , after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever , sat down on the right hand of God .
From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool .
For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified .
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us : for after that he had said before .
This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days , saith the Lord , I will put my laws into their hearts , and in their minds will I write them .
And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more .
Now where remission of these is , there is no more offering for sin .
Having therefore , brethren , boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus .
By a new and living way , which he hath consecrated for us , through the veil , that is to say , his flesh .
And having an high priest over the house of God .
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith , having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience , and our bodies washed with pure water .
Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering ; ( for he is faithful that promised ; )
And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works .
Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together , as the manner of some is ; but exhorting one another : and so much the more , as ye see the day approaching .
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth , there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins .
But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation , which shall devour the adversaries .
He that despised Moses ' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses .
Of how much sorer punishment , suppose ye , shall he be thought worthy , who hath trodden under foot the Son of God , and hath counted the blood of the covenant , wherewith he was sanctified , an unholy thing , and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace ?
For we know him that hath said , Vengeance belongeth unto me , I will recompense , saith the Lord . And again , The Lord shall judge his people .
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God .
But call to remembrance the former days , in which , after ye were illuminated , ye endured a great fight of afflictions .
Partly , whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions ; and partly , whilst ye became companions of them that were so used .
For ye had compassion of me in my bonds , and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods , knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance .
Cast not away therefore your confidence , which hath great recompence of reward .
For ye have need of patience , that , after ye have done the will of God , ye might receive the promise .
For yet a little while , and he that shall come will come , and will not tarry .
Now the just shall live by faith : but if any man draw back , my soul shall have no pleasure in him .
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition ; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul .
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for , the evidence of things not seen .
For by it the elders obtained a good report .
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God , so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear .
By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain , by which he obtained witness that he was righteous , God testifying of his gifts : and by it he being dead yet speaketh .
By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death ; and was not found , because God had translated him : for before his translation he had this testimony , that he pleased God .
But without faith it is impossible to please him : for he that cometh to God must believe that he is , and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him .
By faith Noah , being warned of God of things not seen as yet , moved with fear , prepared an ark to the saving of his house ; by the which he condemned the world , and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith .
By faith Abraham , when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance , obeyed ; and he went out , not knowing whither he went .
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise , as in a strange country , dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob , the heirs with him of the same promise .
For he looked for a city which hath foundations , whose builder and maker is God .
Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed , and was delivered of a child when she was past age , because she judged him faithful who had promised .
Therefore sprang there even of one , and him as good as dead , so many as the stars of the sky in multitude , and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable .
These all died in faith , not having received the promises , but having seen them afar off , and were persuaded of them , and embraced them , and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth .
For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country .
And truly , if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out , they might have had opportunity to have returned .
But now they desire a better country , that is , an heavenly : wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God : for he hath prepared for them a city .
By faith Abraham , when he was tried , offered up Isaac : and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son .
Of whom it was said , That in Isaac shall thy seed be called .
Accounting that God was able to raise him up , even from the dead ; from whence also he received him in a figure .
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come .
By faith Jacob , when he was a dying , blessed both the sons of Joseph ; and worshipped , leaning upon the top of his staff .
By faith Joseph , when he died , made mention of the departing of the children of Israel ; and gave commandment concerning his bones .
By faith Moses , when he was born , was hid three months of his parents , because they saw he was a proper child ; and they were not afraid of the king ' s commandment .
By faith Moses , when he was come to years , refused to be called the son of Pharaoh ' s daughter .
Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God , than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season .
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt : for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward .
By faith he forsook Egypt , not fearing the wrath of the king : for he endured , as seeing him who is invisible .
Through faith he kept the passover , and the sprinkling of blood , lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them .
By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land : which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned .
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down , after they were compassed about seven days .
By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not , when she had received the spies with peace .
And what shall I more say ? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon , and of Barak , and of Samson , and of Jephthae ; of David also , and Samuel , and of the prophets .
Who through faith subdued kingdoms , wrought righteousness , obtained promises , stopped the mouths of lions .
Quenched the violence of fire , escaped the edge of the sword , out of weakness were made strong , waxed valiant in fight , turned to flight the armies of the aliens .
Women received their dead raised to life again : and others were tortured , not accepting deliverance ; that they might obtain a better resurrection .
And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings , yea , moreover of bonds and imprisonment .
They were stoned , they were sawn asunder , were tempted , were slain with the sword : they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins ; being destitute , afflicted , tormented .
( Of whom the world was not worthy : ) they wandered in deserts , and in mountains , and in dens and caves of the earth .
And these all , having obtained a good report through faith , received not the promise .
God having provided some better thing for us , that they without us should not be made perfect .
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses , let us lay aside every weight , and the sin which doth so easily beset us , and let us run with patience the race that is set before us .
Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith ; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross , despising the shame , and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God .
For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself , lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds .
Ye have not yet resisted unto blood , striving against sin .
And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children , My son , despise not thou the chastening of the Lord , nor faint when thou art rebuked of him .
For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth , and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth .
If ye endure chastening , God dealeth with you as with sons ; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not ?
But if ye be without chastisement , whereof all are partakers , then are ye bastards , and not sons .
Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us , and we gave them reverence : shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits , and live ?
For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure ; but he for our profit , that we might be partakers of his holiness .
Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous , but grievous : nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby .
Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down , and the feeble knees .
And make straight paths for your feet , lest that which is lame be turned out of the way ; but let it rather be healed .
Follow peace with all men , and holiness , without which no man shall see the Lord .
Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God ; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you , and thereby many be defiled .
Lest there be any fornicator , or profane person , as Esau , who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright .
For ye know how that afterward , when he would have inherited the blessing , he was rejected : for he found no place of repentance , though he sought it carefully with tears .
For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched , and that burned with fire , nor unto blackness , and darkness , and tempest .
And the sound of a trumpet , and the voice of words ; which voice they that heard intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more .
( For they could not endure that which was commanded , And if so much as a beast touch the mountain , it shall be stoned , or thrust through with a dart .
And so terrible was the sight , that Moses said , I exceedingly fear and quake : )
But ye are come unto mount Sion , and unto the city of the living God , the heavenly Jerusalem , and to an innumerable company of angels .
To the general assembly and church of the firstborn , which are written in heaven , and to God the Judge of all , and to the spirits of just men made perfect .
And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant , and to the blood of sprinkling , that speaketh better things than that of Abel .
See that ye refuse not him that speaketh . For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth , much more shall not we escape , if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven .
Whose voice then shook the earth : but now he hath promised , saying , Yet once more I shake not the earth only , but also heaven .
And this word , Yet once more , signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken , as of things that are made , that those things which cannot be shaken may remain .
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved , let us have grace , whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear .
For our God is a consuming fire .
Let brotherly love continue .
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers : for thereby some have entertained angels unawares .
Remember them that are in bonds , as bound with them ; and them which suffer adversity , as being yourselves also in the body .
Marriage is honourable in all , and the bed undefiled : but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge .
Let your conversation be without covetousness ; and be content with such things as ye have : for he hath said , I will never leave thee , nor forsake thee .
So that we may boldly say , The Lord is my helper , and I will not fear what man shall do unto me .
Remember them which have the rule over you , who have spoken unto you the word of God : whose faith follow , considering the end of their conversation .
Jesus Christ the same yesterday , and to day , and for ever .
Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines . For it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace ; not with meats , which have not profited them that have been occupied therein .
We have an altar , whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle .
For the bodies of those beasts , whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin , are burned without the camp .
Wherefore Jesus also , that he might sanctify the people with his own blood , suffered without the gate .
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp , bearing his reproach .
For here have we no continuing city , but we seek one to come .
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually , that is , the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name .
But to do good and to communicate forget not : for with such sacrifices God is well pleased .
Obey them that have the rule over you , and submit yourselves : for they watch for your souls , as they that must give account , that they may do it with joy , and not with grief : for that is unprofitable for you .
Pray for us : for we trust we have a good conscience , in all things willing to live honestly .
But I beseech you the rather to do this , that I may be restored to you the sooner .
Now the God of peace , that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus , that great shepherd of the sheep , through the blood of the everlasting covenant .
Make you perfect in every good work to do his will , working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight , through Jesus Christ ; to whom be glory for ever and ever . Amen .
And I beseech you , brethren , suffer the word of exhortation : for I have written a letter unto you in few words .
Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty ; with whom , if he come shortly , I will see you .
Salute all them that have the rule over you , and all the saints . They of Italy salute you .
Grace be with you all . Amen .
James , a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ , to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad , greeting .
My brethren , count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations .
Knowing this , that the trying of your faith worketh patience .
But let patience have her perfect work , that ye may be perfect and entire , wanting nothing .
If any of you lack wisdom , let him ask of God , that giveth to all men liberally , and upbraideth not ; and it shall be given him .
But let him ask in faith , nothing wavering . For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed .
For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord .
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways .
Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted .
But the rich , in that he is made low : because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away .
For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat , but it withereth the grass , and the flower thereof falleth , and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth : so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways .
Blessed is the man that endureth temptation : for when he is tried , he shall receive the crown of life , which the Lord hath promised to them that love him .
Let no man say when he is tempted , I am tempted of God : for God cannot be tempted with evil , neither tempteth he any man .
But every man is tempted , when he is drawn away of his own lust , and enticed .
Then when lust hath conceived , it bringeth forth sin : and sin , when it is finished , bringeth forth death .
Do not err , my beloved brethren .
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above , and cometh down from the Father of lights , with whom is no variableness , neither shadow of turning .
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth , that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures .
Wherefore , my beloved brethren , let every man be swift to hear , slow to speak , slow to wrath .
For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God .
Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness , and receive with meekness the engrafted word , which is able to save your souls .
But be ye doers of the word , and not hearers only , deceiving your own selves .
For if any be a hearer of the word , and not a doer , he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass .
For he beholdeth himself , and goeth his way , and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was .
But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty , and continueth therein , he being not a forgetful hearer , but a doer of the work , this man shall be blessed in his deed .
If any man among you seem to be religious , and bridleth not his tongue , but deceiveth his own heart , this man ' s religion is vain .
Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this , To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction , and to keep himself unspotted from the world .
My brethren , have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ , the Lord of glory , with respect of persons .
For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring , in goodly apparel , and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment .
And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing , and say unto him , Sit thou here in a good place ; and say to the poor , Stand thou there , or sit here under my footstool .
Are ye not then partial in yourselves , and are become judges of evil thoughts ?
Hearken , my beloved brethren , Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith , and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him ?
But ye have despised the poor . Do not rich men oppress you , and draw you before the judgment seats ?
Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called ?
If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture , Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself , ye do well .
But if ye have respect to persons , ye commit sin , and are convinced of the law as transgressors .
For whosoever shall keep the whole law , and yet offend in one point , he is guilty of all .
For he that said , Do not commit adultery , said also , Do not kill . Now if thou commit no adultery , yet if thou kill , thou art become a transgressor of the law .
So speak ye , and so do , as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty .
For he shall have judgment without mercy , that hath shewed no mercy ; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment .
What doth it profit , my brethren , though a man say he hath faith , and have not works ? can faith save him ?
If a brother or sister be naked , and destitute of daily food .
And one of you say unto them , Depart in peace , be ye warmed and filled ; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body ; what doth it profit ?
Even so faith , if it hath not works , is dead , being alone .
Yea , a man may say , Thou hast faith , and I have works : shew me thy faith without thy works , and I will shew thee my faith by my works .
Thou believest that there is one God ; thou doest well : the devils also believe , and tremble .
But wilt thou know , O vain man , that faith without works is dead ?
Was not Abraham our father justified by works , when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar ?
Seest thou how faith wrought with his works , and by works was faith made perfect ?
And the scripture was fulfilled which saith , Abraham believed God , and it was imputed unto him for righteousness : and he was called the Friend of God .
Ye see then how that by works a man is justified , and not by faith only .
Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works , when she had received the messengers , and had sent them out another way ?
For as the body without the spirit is dead , so faith without works is dead also .
My brethren , be not many masters , knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation .
For in many things we offend all . If any man offend not in word , the same is a perfect man , and able also to bridle the whole body .
Behold , we put bits in the horses ' mouths , that they may obey us ; and we turn about their whole body .
Behold also the ships , which though they be so great , and are driven of fierce winds , yet are they turned about with a very small helm , whithersoever the governor listeth .
Even so the tongue is a little member , and boasteth great things . Behold , how great a matter a little fire kindleth !
And the tongue is a fire , a world of iniquity : so is the tongue among our members , that it defileth the whole body , and setteth on fire the course of nature ; and it is set on fire of hell .
For every kind of beasts , and of birds , and of serpents , and of things in the sea , is tamed , and hath been tamed of mankind .
But the tongue can no man tame ; it is an unruly evil , full of deadly poison .
Therewith bless we God , even the Father ; and therewith curse we men , which are made after the similitude of God .
Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing . My brethren , these things ought not so to be .
Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter ?
Can the fig tree , my brethren , bear olive berries ? either a vine , figs ? so can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh .
Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you ? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom .
But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts , glory not , and lie not against the truth .
This wisdom descendeth not from above , but is earthly , sensual , devilish .
For where envying and strife is , there is confusion and every evil work .
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure , then peaceable , gentle , and easy to be intreated , full of mercy and good fruits , without partiality , and without hypocrisy .
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace .
From whence come wars and fightings among you ? come they not hence , even of your lusts that war in your members ?
Ye lust , and have not : ye kill , and desire to have , and cannot obtain : ye fight and war , yet ye have not , because ye ask not .
Ye ask , and receive not , because ye ask amiss , that ye may consume it upon your lusts .
Ye adulterers and adulteresses , know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God ? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God .
Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain , The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy ?
But he giveth more grace . Wherefore he saith , God resisteth the proud , but giveth grace unto the humble .
Submit yourselves therefore to God . Resist the devil , and he will flee from you .
Draw nigh to God , and he will draw nigh to you . Cleanse your hands , ye sinners ; and purify your hearts , ye double minded .
Be afflicted , and mourn , and weep : let your laughter be turned to mourning , and your joy to heaviness .
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord , and he shall lift you up .
Speak not evil one of another , brethren . He that speaketh evil of his brother , and judgeth his brother , speaketh evil of the law , and judgeth the law : but if thou judge the law , thou art not a doer of the law , but a judge .
There is one lawgiver , who is able to save and to destroy : who art thou that judgest another ?
Go to now , ye that say , To day or to morrow we will go into such a city , and continue there a year , and buy and sell , and get gain .
Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow . For what is your life ? It is even a vapour , that appeareth for a little time , and then vanisheth away .
For that ye ought to say , If the Lord will , we shall live , and do this , or that .
But now ye rejoice in your boastings : all such rejoicing is evil .
Therefore to him that knoweth to do good , and doeth it not , to him it is sin .
Go to now , ye rich men , weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you .
Your riches are corrupted , and your garments are motheaten .
Your gold and silver is cankered ; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you , and shall eat your flesh as it were fire . Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days .
Behold , the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields , which is of you kept back by fraud , crieth : and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth .
Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth , and been wanton ; ye have nourished your hearts , as in a day of slaughter .
Ye have condemned and killed the just ; and he doth not resist you .
Be patient therefore , brethren , unto the coming of the Lord . Behold , the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth , and hath long patience for it , until he receive the early and latter rain .
Be ye also patient ; stablish your hearts : for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh .
Grudge not one against another , brethren , lest ye be condemned : behold , the judge standeth before the door .
Take , my brethren , the prophets , who have spoken in the name of the Lord , for an example of suffering affliction , and of patience .
Behold , we count them happy which endure . Ye have heard of the patience of Job , and have seen the end of the Lord ; that the Lord is very pitiful , and of tender mercy .
But above all things , my brethren , swear not , neither by heaven , neither by the earth , neither by any other oath : but let your yea be yea ; and your nay , nay ; lest ye fall into condemnation .
Is any among you afflicted ? let him pray . Is any merry ? let him sing psalms .
Is any sick among you ? let him call for the elders of the church ; and let them pray over him , anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord .
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick , and the Lord shall raise him up ; and if he have committed sins , they shall be forgiven him .
Confess your faults one to another , and pray one for another , that ye may be healed . The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much .
Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are , and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain : and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months .
And he prayed again , and the heaven gave rain , and the earth brought forth her fruit .
Brethren , if any of you do err from the truth , and one convert him .
Let him know , that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death , and shall hide a multitude of sins .
Peter , an apostle of Jesus Christ , to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus , Galatia , Cappadocia , Asia , and Bithynia .
Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father , through sanctification of the Spirit , unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ : Grace unto you , and peace , be multiplied .
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead .
To an inheritance incorruptible , and undefiled , and that fadeth not away , reserved in heaven for you .
Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time .
Wherein ye greatly rejoice , though now for a season , if need be , ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations .
That the trial of your faith , being much more precious than of gold that perisheth , though it be tried with fire , might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ .
Whom having not seen , ye love ; in whom , though now ye see him not , yet believing , ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory .
Receiving the end of your faith , even the salvation of your souls .
Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently , who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you .
Searching what , or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify , when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ , and the glory that should follow .
Unto whom it was revealed , that not unto themselves , but unto us they did minister the things , which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven ; which things the angels desire to look into .
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind , be sober , and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ .
As obedient children , not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance .
But as he which hath called you is holy , so be ye holy in all manner of conversation .
Because it is written , Be ye holy ; for I am holy .
And if ye call on the Father , who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man ' s work , pass the time of your sojourning here in fear .
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things , as silver and gold , from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers .
But with the precious blood of Christ , as of a lamb without blemish and without spot .
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world , but was manifest in these last times for you .
Who by him do believe in God , that raised him up from the dead , and gave him glory ; that your faith and hope might be in God .
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren , see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently .
Being born again , not of corruptible seed , but of incorruptible , by the word of God , which liveth and abideth for ever .
For all flesh is as grass , and all the glory of man as the flower of grass . The grass withereth , and the flower thereof falleth away .
But the word of the Lord endureth for ever . And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you .
Wherefore laying aside all malice , and all guile , and hypocrisies , and envies , and all evil speakings .
As newborn babes , desire the sincere milk of the word , that ye may grow thereby .
If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious .
To whom coming , as unto a living stone , disallowed indeed of men , but chosen of God , and precious .
Ye also , as lively stones , are built up a spiritual house , an holy priesthood , to offer up spiritual sacrifices , acceptable to God by Jesus Christ .
Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture , Behold , I lay in Sion a chief corner stone , elect , precious : and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded .
Unto you therefore which believe he is precious : but unto them which be disobedient , the stone which the builders disallowed , the same is made the head of the corner .
And a stone of stumbling , and a rock of offence , even to them which stumble at the word , being disobedient : whereunto also they were appointed .
But ye are a chosen generation , a royal priesthood , an holy nation , a peculiar people ; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light .
Which in time past were not a people , but are now the people of God : which had not obtained mercy , but now have obtained mercy .
Dearly beloved , I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims , abstain from fleshly lusts , which war against the soul .
Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles : that , whereas they speak against you as evildoers , they may by your good works , which they shall behold , glorify God in the day of visitation .
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord ' s sake : whether it be to the king , as supreme .
Or unto governors , as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers , and for the praise of them that do well .
For so is the will of God , that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men .
As free , and not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness , but as the servants of God .
Honour all men . Love the brotherhood . Fear God . Honour the king .
Servants , be subject to your masters with all fear ; not only to the good and gentle , but also to the froward .
For this is thankworthy , if a man for conscience toward God endure grief , suffering wrongfully .
For what glory is it , if , when ye be buffeted for your faults , ye shall take it patiently ? but if , when ye do well , and suffer for it , ye take it patiently , this is acceptable with God .
For even hereunto were ye called : because Christ also suffered for us , leaving us an example , that ye should follow his steps .
Who did no sin , neither was guile found in his mouth .
Who , when he was reviled , reviled not again ; when he suffered , he threatened not ; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously .
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree , that we , being dead to sins , should live unto righteousness : by whose stripes ye were healed .
For ye were as sheep going astray ; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls .
Likewise , ye wives , be in subjection to your own husbands ; that , if any obey not the word , they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives .
While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear .
Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair , and of wearing of gold , or of putting on of apparel .
But let it be the hidden man of the heart , in that which is not corruptible , even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit , which is in the sight of God of great price .
For after this manner in the old time the holy women also , who trusted in God , adorned themselves , being in subjection unto their own husbands .
Even as Sara obeyed Abraham , calling him lord : whose daughters ye are , as long as ye do well , and are not afraid with any amazement .
Likewise , ye husbands , dwell with them according to knowledge , giving honour unto the wife , as unto the weaker vessel , and as being heirs together of the grace of life ; that your prayers be not hindered .
Finally , be ye all of one mind , having compassion one of another , love as brethren , be pitiful , be courteous .
Not rendering evil for evil , or railing for railing : but contrariwise blessing ; knowing that ye are thereunto called , that ye should inherit a blessing .
For he that will love life , and see good days , let him refrain his tongue from evil , and his lips that they speak no guile .
Let him eschew evil , and do good ; let him seek peace , and ensue it .
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous , and his ears are open unto their prayers : but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil .
And who is he that will harm you , if ye be followers of that which is good ?
But and if ye suffer for righteousness ' sake , happy are ye : and be not afraid of their terror , neither be troubled .
But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts : and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear .
Having a good conscience ; that , whereas they speak evil of you , as of evildoers , they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ .
For it is better , if the will of God be so , that ye suffer for well doing , than for evil doing .
For Christ also hath once suffered for sins , the just for the unjust , that he might bring us to God , being put to death in the flesh , but quickened by the Spirit .
By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison .
Which sometime were disobedient , when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah , while the ark was a preparing , wherein few , that is , eight souls were saved by water .
The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us ( not the putting away of the filth of the flesh , but the answer of a good conscience toward God , ) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ .
Who is gone into heaven , and is on the right hand of God ; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him .
Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh , arm yourselves likewise with the same mind : for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin .
That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men , but to the will of God .
For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles , when we walked in lasciviousness , lusts , excess of wine , revellings , banquetings , and abominable idolatries .
Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot , speaking evil of you .
Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead .
For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead , that they might be judged according to men in the flesh , but live according to God in the spirit .
But the end of all things is at hand : be ye therefore sober , and watch unto prayer .
And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves : for charity shall cover the multitude of sins .
Use hospitality one to another without grudging .
As every man hath received the gift , even so minister the same one to another , as good stewards of the manifold grace of God .
If any man speak , let him speak as the oracles of God ; if any man minister , let him do it as of the ability which God giveth : that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ , to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever . Amen .
Beloved , think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you , as though some strange thing happened unto you .
But rejoice , inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ ' s sufferings ; that , when his glory shall be revealed , ye may be glad also with exceeding joy .
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ , happy are ye ; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you : on their part he is evil spoken of , but on your part he is glorified .
But let none of you suffer as a murderer , or as a thief , or as an evildoer , or as a busybody in other men ' s matters .
Yet if any man suffer as a Christian , let him not be ashamed ; but let him glorify God on this behalf .
For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God : and if it first begin at us , what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God ?
And if the righteous scarcely be saved , where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear ?
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing , as unto a faithful Creator .
The elders which are among you I exhort , who am also an elder , and a witness of the sufferings of Christ , and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed .
Feed the flock of God which is among you , taking the oversight thereof , not by constraint , but willingly ; not for filthy lucre , but of a ready mind .
Neither as being lords over God ' s heritage , but being ensamples to the flock .
And when the chief Shepherd shall appear , ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away .
Likewise , ye younger , submit yourselves unto the elder . Yea , all of you be subject one to another , and be clothed with humility : for God resisteth the proud , and giveth grace to the humble .
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God , that he may exalt you in due time .
Casting all your care upon him ; for he careth for you .
Be sober , be vigilant ; because your adversary the devil , as a roaring lion , walketh about , seeking whom he may devour .
Whom resist stedfast in the faith , knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world .
But the God of all grace , who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus , after that ye have suffered a while , make you perfect , stablish , strengthen , settle you .
To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever . Amen .
By Silvanus , a faithful brother unto you , as I suppose , I have written briefly , exhorting , and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand .
The church that is at Babylon , elected together with you , saluteth you ; and so doth Marcus my son .
Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity . Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus . Amen .
Simon Peter , a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ , to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ .
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God , and of Jesus our Lord .
According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness , through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue .
Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises : that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature , having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust .
And beside this , giving all diligence , add to your faith virtue ; and to virtue knowledge .
And to knowledge temperance ; and to temperance patience ; and to patience godliness .
And to godliness brotherly kindness ; and to brotherly kindness charity .
For if these things be in you , and abound , they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ .
But he that lacketh these things is blind , and cannot see afar off , and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins .
Wherefore the rather , brethren , give diligence to make your calling and election sure : for if ye do these things , ye shall never fall .
For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ .
Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things , though ye know them , and be established in the present truth .
Yea , I think it meet , as long as I am in this tabernacle , to stir you up by putting you in remembrance .
Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle , even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me .
Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance .
For we have not followed cunningly devised fables , when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ , but were eyewitnesses of his majesty .
For he received from God the Father honour and glory , when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory , This is my beloved Son , in whom I am well pleased .
And this voice which came from heaven we heard , when we were with him in the holy mount .
We have also a more sure word of prophecy ; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed , as unto a light that shineth in a dark place , until the day dawn , and the day star arise in your hearts .
Knowing this first , that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation .
For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man : but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost .
But there were false prophets also among the people , even as there shall be false teachers among you , who privily shall bring in damnable heresies , even denying the Lord that bought them , and bring upon themselves swift destruction .
And many shall follow their pernicious ways ; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of .
And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you : whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not , and their damnation slumbereth not .
For if God spared not the angels that sinned , but cast them down to hell , and delivered them into chains of darkness , to be reserved unto judgment .
And spared not the old world , but saved Noah the eighth person , a preacher of righteousness , bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly .
And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow , making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly .
And delivered just Lot , vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked .
( For that righteous man dwelling among them , in seeing and hearing , vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds ; )
The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations , and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished .
But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness , and despise government . Presumptuous are they , selfwilled , they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities .
Whereas angels , which are greater in power and might , bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord .
But these , as natural brute beasts , made to be taken and destroyed , speak evil of the things that they understand not ; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption .
And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness , as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time . Spots they are and blemishes , sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you .
Having eyes full of adultery , and that cannot cease from sin ; beguiling unstable souls : an heart they have exercised with covetous practices ; cursed children .
Which have forsaken the right way , and are gone astray , following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor , who loved the wages of unrighteousness .
But was rebuked for his iniquity : the dumb ass speaking with man ' s voice forbad the madness of the prophet .
These are wells without water , clouds that are carried with a tempest ; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever .
For when they speak great swelling words of vanity , they allure through the lusts of the flesh , through much wantonness , those that were clean escaped from them who live in error .
While they promise them liberty , they themselves are the servants of corruption : for of whom a man is overcome , of the same is he brought in bondage .
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ , they are again entangled therein , and overcome , the latter end is worse with them than the beginning .
For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness , than , after they have known it , to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them .
But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb , The dog is turned to his own vomit again ; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire .
This second epistle , beloved , I now write unto you ; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance .
That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets , and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour .
Knowing this first , that there shall come in the last days scoffers , walking after their own lusts .
And saying , Where is the promise of his coming ? for since the fathers fell asleep , all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation .
For this they willingly are ignorant of , that by the word of God the heavens were of old , and the earth standing out of the water and in the water .
Whereby the world that then was , being overflowed with water , perished .
But the heavens and the earth , which are now , by the same word are kept in store , reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men .
But , beloved , be not ignorant of this one thing , that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years , and a thousand years as one day .
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise , as some men count slackness ; but is longsuffering to us - ward , not willing that any should perish , but that all should come to repentance .
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night ; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise , and the elements shall melt with fervent heat , the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up .
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved , what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness .
Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God , wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved , and the elements shall melt with fervent heat ?
Nevertheless we , according to his promise , look for new heavens and a new earth , wherein dwelleth righteousness .
Wherefore , beloved , seeing that ye look for such things , be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace , without spot , and blameless .
And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation ; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you .
As also in all his epistles , speaking in them of these things ; in which are some things hard to be understood , which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest , as they do also the other scriptures , unto their own destruction .
Ye therefore , beloved , seeing ye know these things before , beware lest ye also , being led away with the error of the wicked , fall from your own stedfastness .
But grow in grace , and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ . To him be glory both now and for ever . Amen .
That which was from the beginning , which we have heard , which we have seen with our eyes , which we have looked upon , and our hands have handled , of the Word of life .
( For the life was manifested , and we have seen it , and bear witness , and shew unto you that eternal life , which was with the Father , and was manifested unto us ; )
That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you , that ye also may have fellowship with us : and truly our fellowship is with the Father , and with his Son Jesus Christ .
And these things write we unto you , that your joy may be full .
﻿All praise be to Allah alone , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Most Compassionate , Ever - Merciful .
Master of the Day of Judgment .
( O Allah ! ) You alone do we worship and to You alone we look for help .
Show us the straight path .
The path of those upon whom You have bestowed Your favours .
Not of those who have been afflicted with wrath and nor of those who have gone astray .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( This is ) the Glorious Book in which there is no chance of doubt . ( It is ) a guide for those who guard against evil and fear Allah .
Those who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer ( fulfilling all requisites ) and spend ( in Our way ) out of what We have given them .
And those who believe in ( all ) that which has been revealed to you and that which was revealed before you , and also have ( perfect ) faith in the life after death .
It is they who follow Guidance from their Lord and it is they who shall achieve real success .
Verily those who have adopted disbelief , it is the same for them whether you warn them or you warn them not , they will not believe .
Allah ( as a result of their own choice ) has set a seal on their hearts and their ears and there is a blindfold ( set ) over their eyes . And for them there is severe torment .
And amongst people there are ( also ) some who say : We believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment , whereas they are not ( at all ) believers .
They seek to deceive Allah ( i . e . the Messenger ) and the believers but ( in fact ) they deceive only themselves and they are not aware of it .
In their hearts is a disease . So Allah has worsened their disease . For them , there is painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
When it is said to them : Do not spread disorder in the land , they say : It is we who reform .
Beware ! ( Truly ) it is they who spread disorder , but they do not have any sense ( of it ) at all .
And when it is said to them : Believe as ( other ) people have believed , they say : Shall we also believe ( as those ) fools have believed ? Beware ! ( Certainly ) they are themselves fools but they do not know ( their foolishness and low level ) .
And when they ( the hypocrites ) meet the believers , they say : We ( too ) have believed , and when they meet their devils in privacy they assure them : We are certainly with you . We only mock ( the believers ) .
Allah punishes them for their mockery and lets them loose ( so that they meet their fate ) . So they are wandering blindly in their transgression .
These are the people who have purchased misguidance for guidance ; but their trade did not yield any gain and they did not know the way to ( gainful and profitable ) bargain .
Their example is like a person who lit a fire ( in surrounding darkness ) and when it brightened the environment , Allah took away their light and left them in total darkness . Now they cannot see anything .
They are deaf , dumb and blind . So they will not return ( to the right path ) .
Or their example is like a rain pouring from the sky wherein there are layers of darkness , thunder and lightning ( as well ) . They thrust their fingers into their ears fearing death owing to thunder . And Allah has encompassed the disbelievers .
It seems as if the lightning would snatch away their sight .
When their ( surroundings ) are lit with a flash , they start walking
and when darkness covers them , they stand still .
And if Allah willed , He could deprive them absolutely of hearing and sight .
Surely Allah is All - Powerful to do everything .
O People ! Worship your Lord Who created you and ( also ) those who were before you , so that you become God - wary .
( He is the One ) Who spread out the earth for you as a floor , and erected the sky as a mansion , and showered water from the sky and brought forth with that ( a variety of ) fruits for your nourishment .
So , do not set up equals with Allah while you know ( the truth of the matter ) .
And if you are in doubt about this ( Book ) which We have revealed to Our ( exalted ) servant , then produce only one chapter like this . And ( for this task ) you may call upon ( all ) your helpers apart from Allah , if you are true ( in your doubt and denial ) .
But if you fail to do it and you shall never be able to do it then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is human beings ( the disbelievers ) and stones ( their idols ) which is prepared for disbelievers .
And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who believe and keep doing pious deeds that for them there are gardens ( of Paradise ) beneath which streams flow .
When some fruit will be given to them from these gardens to eat they will say ( looking at its appearance ) :
This is the same fruit that was provided to us ( in the world ) before ,
whereas they shall be given fruits resembling ( only in appearance ) .
In Paradise there will ( also ) be chaste spouses for them and they shall abide there forever .
Indeed Allah is not reluctant to narrate some example ( for better comprehension ) , whether of a mosquito or something even more ( disgusting ) than that .
The believers know well that this example is a ( pointer to the Truth ) from their Lord .
But those who have adopted disbelief ask ( on hearing ) : What could Allah mean by this example ?
( In this way ) Allah holds many astray and guides many aright with the same example .
And by this He leaves in error only those who are ( already ) disobedient .
( These disobedient people are those ) who break the promise of Allah after having confirmed it , and break that ( relationship ) which Allah has ordered to join , and create disorder in the land . It is they who are the losers .
How can you deny Allah whereas you were lifeless and He gave you life , then He will cause you to die and will again bring you back to life , and then to Him will you be returned ?
He is the One Who created for you all that is in the earth . Then He turned towards higher regions ( of the universe ) and perfected them into seven heavenly firmaments . And He has full knowledge of everything .
And ( call to mind ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to place My deputy on the earth . They submitted : Will You put as Your ( vicegerent ) on the earth such as will do mischief in it and shed blood , while we are engaged in glorifying You with celebrating Your Praise and extolling Your Holiness ( all the time ) ? ( Allah ) said : I know that which you do not know .
And Allah taught Adam the names of all ( things ) , and then set them before the angels and said : Tell Me the names of these things if you are true ( in your assumption ) .
The angels ( humbly ) submitted : Glory to You , You are Holy ( Free from every deficiency ) . We have no knowledge except that which You have taught us . Surely , You alone are All - Knowing , All - Wise .
Allah said : O Adam , ( now ) apprise them of the names of these things . So when Adam had told them the names of those things , ( Allah ) said : Did I not tell you I know ( all ) the hidden realities of the heavens and the earth and also know all that you disclose and all that you conceal ?
And ( also recall the time ) when We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam . Then they all prostrated themselves to Adam except Iblis ( Satan ) . He refused and showed arrogance and ( consequently ) became one of the disbelievers .
And We ordained : Adam , reside you and your wife in this Paradise and eat of it , both of you , whatever you like and from wherever you will . But do not go near this tree lest you ( join ) the transgressors .
Then Satan shook them from that place and removed them from the ( blissful ) location where they were . And ( eventually ) We ordained : Go down ( and live in the earth ) ; you will remain enemies to each other , and now in the earth has been destined a dwelling place and sustenance for you for a fixed time .
Then Adam learnt some words ( of humility and repentance ) from his Lord . So Allah accepted his repentance . Surely He is the One Who is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
We said : Leave it ( the Paradise and settle in the earth ) all of you . Then if there comes to you Guidance from Me , whoever will follow My Guidance , neither shall any fear ( obsess ) them nor shall they grieve .
And those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , it is they who shall be the inmates of Fire . They shall abide in it forever .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall My favours which I bestowed upon you and fulfil the promise ( made ) to Me , I shall fulfil the promise ( made ) to you . And always fear Me alone .
And believe in ( the Book ) that I have revealed ( to My Messenger Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) while it confirms ( originally ) that which you possess . And do not be the first to deny it nor barter My Revelations for a small ( worldly ) price . And fear Me alone .
And do not mix up the truth with falsehood nor conceal the truth deliberately .
And establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly and kneel down ( together ) with those who kneel down .
Do you command others for piety and forget yourselves , while you ( also ) recite the Book ( of Allah ) ? So , do you not think ?
And seek ( Allahs ) help through patience and Prayer . But this is no doubt hard except for the humble ( whose hearts have been softened with the Love of Allah and gripped with His Fear ) .
( It is they ) who are certain that they are about to meet their Lord and to Him are they going to return .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall those favours that I bestowed upon you and that I exalted you above all the people ( of your age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to pay any compensation on behalf of another .
Nor shall any intercession be accepted from him ( of a person who shall not have Allahs permission to intercede ) .
Nor shall any compensation be accepted from him ( for his own salvation ) .
And they will not be helped ( against Allahs decree ) .
And ( also call to your mind the time ) when We delivered you from Pharaohs people , who used to inflict severe torment upon you : they slaughtered your sons and kept your daughters alive . There was an arduously terrible trial in it from your Lord .
And when We parted the river ( to rescue you ) and ( in this way ) delivered you and ( on the contrary ) We drowned Pharaohs people before your eyes .
And ( also recall the time ) when We made an appointment with Musa ( Moses ) for forty nights . Then after Musa ( Moses went into retreat ) you took the calf as ( your ) god for worship and you were no doubt aweful transgressors .
Then We pardoned you ( even ) after that so that you might give thanks .
And when We bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) the Book and the miracle distinguishing the truth from falsehood so that you might take the path of guidance .
And when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people , no doubt you have ( seriously ) wronged your own souls in taking the calf ( as your god ) . Now turn in repentance to your Creator ( the True Sustainer ) .
So , kill one another ( among yourselves so that those who have not taken the calf for worship and stuck to their religion should kill those who worshipped the calf as punishment for turning away from their religion .
This ( act ) would be the best ( repentance ) for you in the sight of your Creator .
Then He accepted your repentance .
Surely , He is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! We will never believe in you until we see Allah completely unveiled ( before our eyes ) . So , ( on this ) a thunder seized ( and eliminated ) you , and you kept watching ( this spectacle yourselves ) .
Then We brought you back to life after your death so that you pay ( Us ) thanks .
And ( recall ) when We cast the shade of clouds over you ( in the Tiha valley ) and sent down for you manna and quails so that you might eat of the pure things We provided for you . So they did not harm Us at all ( by disobeying and showing Us disregard ) but harmed persistently their own souls .
And ( remember ) when We said : Enter this city and eat as much as you wish from wherever you desire but enter ( the city ) gate prostrating and praying : ( O our Lord ! ) We seek forgiveness ( for all of our sins ) . We shall ( then ) forgive your ( previous ) sins and , ( besides , ) We shall bestow more ( favours and blessings ) upon the righteous .
But ( those ) transgressors substituted some other phrase in place of that which was said to them . So We sent down a calamity from heaven on ( those ) evildoers ( in the form of plague ) because they were disobeying ( persistently ) .
And ( recall also the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) prayed for water for his people . We directed : Strike that rock with your stick . Then twelve springs gushed out of that ( rock ) . Verily each clan identified their respective drinking place . ( We said : ) Eat and drink of the sustenance ( given ) by Allah but do not seek doing mischief in the land .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) , we cannot be content with only one kind of food ( i . e . manna and quails ) , so pray to your Lord ( in our favour ) that He may bring forth for us of cultivated produce : green herbs , cucumbers , wheat , garlic , lentils and onions .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said ( to his people ) : Do you demand something inferior in exchange for something superior ? ( And if that is what you wish then ) go down to any city . Surely ( there ) will be ( available ) all what you demand .
Then dishonour and deprivation were brought upon them and they incurred the wrath of Allah because they used to deny the Signs of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly .
This was also because they used to disobey and would ( always ) exceed limits .
Verily , those who have believed , and ( those who were ) Jews and Christians and Sabians , those ( of them ) who believe in Allah and the Last Day and act piously , there is for them their reward with their Lord . Neither shall any fear obsess them , nor shall they grieve .
And ( recall ) when We took a firm promise from you and raised the Mount of Sinai high above you , so that you hold fast firmly what We have given you . And bear in mind whatever is ( written ) in this ( Book , the Torah , ) so that you become pious .
Yet you turned back after this ( promise and warning ) . So , had there not been Allahs Bounty and His Mercy upon you , you would have been wrecked indeed .
And , ( O Jews , ) certainly you know well those of you who violated ( the injunctions concerning ) the Sabbath ( Saturday ) . So We said to them : Be you apes , rejected and despised .
So We made this ( event ) a lesson of warning for their contemporaries as well as for later generations , and ( a source of ) admonition for the pious .
And ( also recollect the event ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Verily , Allah enjoins you to sacrifice a cow . They said : Do you make a fool of us ? Musa ( Moses ) said : I seek the protection of Allah ( against ) becoming one of the ignorant .
( Then ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what kind of cow ( that ) shall be ? ( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Certainly He ordains that the cow is to be neither old nor young ( heifer ) , but in between ( fully grown ) . So now implement what you have been ordered .
They ( again ) said : Pray to your Lord for us that He may specify what her colour should be . Musa ( Moses ) said : He says , the cow should be yellow , rich in tone , ( so attractive that ) it pleases the viewers .
( This time ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what exact type of cow it is ( because ) the cow has become doubtful to us , and if Allah so wills , we shall indeed be guided aright .
( Musa [ Moses ] said , ) Allah has ordained : ( That is not any inferior cow . Instead ) it is certainly ( a superior ) cow , which has been employed neither for ploughing nor for watering the field , a cow in sound health , without any blemish . They said : Now you ( have ) brought the truth . So they sacrificed it though they did not look like doing it .
And when you killed a man then started disputing among yourselves ( for its blame ) , and Allah was to unveil that event which you were concealing .
Then We commanded : Strike this ( dead body ) with a piece of this ( cow ) . That is how Allah restores the dead to life ( or will give life to the dead on the Day of Resurrection , ) and shows you His Signs so that you may apply your knowledge and understanding .
Then ( even ) after this your hearts hardened . So ( in hardness ) they ( have become ) like stones or even harder .
For of stones there are some from which streams burst out ; and , certainly , some out of them are such ( stones ) that split up and water gushes out of them ;
nd indeed there are others of them that fall due to fear of Allah .
( Alas ! Your hearts have not remained even that much soft , tender and feeble ) and Allah is not unaware of what you do .
( O Muslims ! ) Do you expect that they ( the Jews ) will believe in you whereas amongst them were people of a group who heard the Word of Allah ( Taurat [ the Torah ] ) then altered it ( themselves ) after understanding it , although they knew well ( what the Truth was and what they were doing ) ?
And ( they have reached such state ) when they meet the believers they say : We ( too ) have believed ( in Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , like you ) ,
and when they are together in isolation , they say : Do you tell them ( the Muslims ) that which Allah has unfolded to you ( through the Torah in connection with the Prophethood and glory of the last of the Prophets , Muhammad , blessings and peace be upon him ) so that they may use it in argument against you in the Holy Presence of your Lord ? Do you not have ( even this much ) sense ?
Are they not aware that Allah knows full well all that they hide and all that they show ?
And among them ( the Jews , some ) are illiterate ( as well ) who do not know ( even the bare minimum about the meaning and connotations of ) the Book ( except hearsay and false hopes ) . They know only to recite ( the Book ) verbally and follow mere speculation and assumption .
So , a serious disaster awaits those who write the Book with their own hands , then say : This is from Allah , just to earn a paltry price against that . So they will face destruction ( owing to the Book ) that their hands have written and ( for the compensation ) that they are earning .
And they ( the Jews also ) say : The Fire ( of Hell ) shall not touch us except for a small number of days . ( Just ) ask ( them ) : Have you obtained ( such ) a promise from Allah ? Then He will never violate His promise . Or do you make inadvertently ( such an ) allegation against Allah which you do not know yourselves .
Of course he who adopts evil and is encompassed by his sins , it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They are its permanent residents .
And those who have believed and have done pious deeds , it is they who are the inhabitants of Paradise . They shall live there forever .
And ( remember ) when We took a firm promise from the Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) : Do not worship ( anyone ) besides Allah , and be nice to the parents and ( do good to ) the kindred and orphans and the needy .
And ( also ) talk of piety to the common people ( in a polite and nice manner ) . And establish Prayer and pay on Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
Then , except a few , all the rest of you turned back ( from the promise , ) and you are but averse ( to the Truth ) .
And when We took from you ( this ) solemn covenant ( as well ) : You shall not shed one anothers blood ( among yourselves ) nor shall you expel your people ( from their homes and townships ) . Then you agreed ( to implement it ) and you ( also ) bear witness ( to it ) .
Yet it is you who are killing your own people and banishing a section of your own folk from their homeland , and ( furthermore ) helping ( their enemies ) with sin and transgression against them .
And if they come to you as captives , you ransom their release ( so that they remain obliged to you ) whereas it had been forbidden to you to exile them from their homeland .
Do you believe in some parts of the Book and deny some others ? So he who does so from amongst you , what can be his punishment but disgrace ( and humiliation ) in the worldly life
and ( also ) on the Day of Resurrection ( such people ) will be returned to the most ruthless torment . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
It is they who have purchased the worldly life for the Hereafter . So neither will their torment be lessened nor will they be helped .
And surely We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( the Torah ) and sent ( many ) Messengers after him in succession .
And We gave Isa , son of Maryam , ( Jesus , son of Mary , ) as well luminous Signs and strengthened ( and supported ) him by means of the Holy Spirit .
But ( what followed is that ) whenever a Messenger brought to you ( the Commandments ) whom your ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , you adamantly resisted there and then . You belied some of them and started killing others .
And the Jews said : Our hearts are wrapped up in covers . ( Nay , ) but Allah has cursed them for their revolt against faith . So , little do they believe .
And when the Book ( the Quran ) came to them from Allah which ( originally ) validates that Book ( the Torah ) which was with them , whereas , before this , they themselves used to pray for victory over the disbelievers ( through the intermediation of the Last Prophet , Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him , ] and the Holy Quran revealed to him ) ,
but when came to them the same Prophet ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , along with the Book revealed to him , the Quran ) whom they had ( already ) recognized , they denied him . So Allahs curse is upon such ( deliberate ) disbelievers .
How evil a bargain they made in exchange for their lives : that they deny the Book revealed by Allah merely begrudging that Allah bestows ( His revelation ) out of His Bounty upon any of His servants He wills . So they earned manifold wrath of Allah and there is a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
And when it is said to them : Believe in this ( Book ) which Allah has ( now ) revealed , they say : We believe only in that ( Book ) which was revealed to us , and they deny all other than that , whereas this ( Quran ) is ( also ) the Truth ( and ) confirms that ( Book as well ) which they possess . Ask ( them ) : Then why have you been killing the Prophets of Allah before this if you ( really ) believe ( but in your own Book ) ?
And ( the fact remains that ) Musa ( [ Moses ] himself ) brought you clear Signs . Then you took the calf as god after him . And you are but wicked ( without any doubt ) .
And when We took a firm promise from you and We raised the Mount of Sinai high above you ( saying ) : Hold fast to this ( Book ) which We have given you and listen ( to Our Commandment ) . Then ( your chiefs ) said : We have heard but not obeyed . And owing to their revolt against faith ( kufr ) , their hearts were imbued with the love of the calf .
( O Beloved , ) say ( to them ) : These utterances are ( most ) vile which your ( so - called ) faith commands you , if you believe ( in them truly ) .
Say : If in the sight of Allah the dwelling in the Hereafter is reserved for you alone and not for others , then long for death ( without any fear ) if ( you presume ) you are truthful .
But they will never long for it because of the sins ( and atrocities ) their hands have sent ahead ( or have committed already ) and Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And you will certainly find them the most ambitious of mankind for longevity , ( even ) more than the polytheists aspire to attain . Each one of them desires that he should be granted life of a thousand ( years ) . But even if he is granted , such a prolonged life cannot save him from the torment . And Allah is monitoring their deeds minutely .
Say : Whoever is an enemy to Jibril ( [ Gabriel ] he is doing injustice ) , because he is the one who has brought down upon your heart only by Allahs Command ( the Quran which ) confirms the preceding ( Books ) and contains ( absolute ) guidance and glad tidings for the believers .
He who is an enemy to Allah , His angels , His Messengers and Gabriel and Michael , verily Allah ( too ) is an enemy to ( these ) disbelievers .
And certainly We have sent down to you luminous Signs and none but the disobedient can deny them .
And is it ( not so ) that every time they made a promise , a party of them disregarded and threw it aside ? The fact is that most of them do not believe .
And ( likewise ) when there came to them from Allah the Messenger , ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , ) who ( originally ) confirms that Book which they ( already ) possessed , a party of these People of the Book threw the ( same ) Book of Allah ( the Torah ) behind their backs as if they did not know
( it , whereas the same Torah had brought them the good news of the holy arrival of Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , the Last Prophet ) .
And they ( the Jews ) pursued that ( magic as well ) which the devils used to recite during the reign of Sulaiman ( Solomon ) .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) did not disbelieve ( any way ) .
It was in fact the devils that disbelieved .
They used to teach witchcraft to the people and ( also ) pursued that ( sorcery ) which was sent down upon the two angels named Harut and Marut in the city of Babylon .
They both did not teach anything to anyone , so much so that they would say : We are merely ( for ) trial , therefore , do not become disbelievers ( by putting faith in it ) .
In spite of that those ( Jews ) used to learn such ( magic ) from both of them by which they caused separation between husband and wife .
Yet they cannot harm anyone by this except under the Command of Allah .
And they learn only the things which are harmful to them and bring them no profit .
And surely they ( also ) knew that he who would buy this ( sorcery or disbelief ) would not have any share in the Hereafter .
And most evil is that for which they sold ( the real well - being or the success of ) their souls ( in the Hereafter ) .
Would that they knew ( the truth of ) this ( bargain ) !
But if they had believed and become God - fearing , ( even a little ) reward from Allah would have been far better ( than all these things ) . If they but knew ( this secret ) !
O Believers ! ( Seeking the kind attention of the Holy Prophet , ) do not say : Raina ( pay attention to us ) , but submit ( most humbly ) : Unzurna ( bless us with your benevolent gaze ! ) , and be all ears ( towards his gracious discourse ) . And there is grievous torment for the disbelievers .
Neither the disbelievers among the People of the Book nor the polytheists like that any blessing should descend upon you from your Lord . And Allah especially chooses whom He pleases for His Mercy . And Allah possesses Infinite Bounties .
When We abrogate some verse or cause it to be forgotten , ( in either case ) We bring ( some other verse ) better than or similar to it . Do you not know that Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything ?
Do you not know that the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone , and that you have neither any friend nor helper aside from Allah ?
( O Muslims ! ) Do you also want to ask your Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) questions the way Musa ( Moses ) was asked before ? So he who changes belief for disbelief , for sure , loses the right path .
Many of the People of the Book desire to turn you back to disbelief after you have believed because of the jealousy they have in their hearts , despite the fact that the Truth has become evident to them . So keep forbearing and overlooking till Allah sends His Command . Verily Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything .
And ( always ) establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly . And whatever virtue you will send ahead , you shall find it with Allah . Surely Allah is watching all that you are doing .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : No one will enter Paradise except he who is a Jew or a Christian . These are their false hopes . Say : Produce your proof ( in favour of this desire ) if you are rightful ( in your claim ) .
Yes , of course , he who submits his face to Allah ( i . e . consigns himself to Allah ) and becomes a man of excellence in piety , he will find his reward with his Lord . Such people will neither fear anything nor grieve .
And the Jews say : The Christians do not have their base upon anything ( i . e . sound faith ) , and the Christians say : The Jews do not have their base upon anything , yet they ( all ) read the Book ( revealed by Allah ) .
Likewise , they ( the polytheists ) who do not have any ( heavenly ) knowledge ( at all ) also make statements like theirs .
So Allah will ( Himself ) judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in the matter in which they differ .
And who is more unjust than he who forbids remembering Allahs Name in His mosques and strives to desolate them ? It was not proper for them to enter the mosques but fearing ( Allah ) . For them is disgrace in this world and ( also ) there is a dreadful torment for them in the Hereafter .
And the East and the West ( all ) belong to Allah alone . So whichever direction you turn to , there is the Presence of Allah ( i . e . the Essence of Allah is radiantly manifest in all directions ) . Surely Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And they say : Allah has begotten a son for Himself , while Holy and Transcendent is He , far above ( this ) . Rather ( all ) that is in the heavens and in the earth is His ( Creation and belonging and ) all are subservient to Him .
He is the One Who has created the heavens and the earth and when He wills to ( originate ) a thing , He only says to it : Be , and it becomes .
And those who lack knowledge say : Why does Allah not speak to us or why does any Sign not come to us ( directly ) ? Likewise the people before them also said words similar to theirs . The hearts of ( all ) these people are alike . We have indeed made the Signs explicit for those whose faith is firm .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We have certainly sent you with the Truth as a Bearer of good news and as a Warner . And you will not be asked about the inmates of Hell .
And the Jews and the Christians shall , by no means , be pleased with you ( till ) you follow their religion . Say : Surely , the guidance ( given ) by Allah only is the ( real ) guidance .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And , ( supposing the impossible , ) if you follow their desires after that knowledge which has come to you ( from Allah ) then there will not be any friend or helper for you to protect you from Allah .
( Also there are people ) whom We gave the Book . They recite it as it ought to be recited . It is these people who believe in it ( the Book ) . And those who deny it , it is they who are the losers .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Remember My favour that I bestowed upon you and ( especially ) the supremacy which I awarded you over all the communities ( of that age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to recompense anything on behalf of another ; nor shall any ransom be accepted from him ( to deliver himself ) ; nor shall any intercession benefit him ( without Allahs permission ) and nor shall they be helped ( against the Command of Allah ) .
And ( call to mind ) when the Lord of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) tested him with several commands which he fulfilled . ( On this ) Allah said : I am going to make you the leader of mankind . He submitted : And from my children as well ? Allah said : ( Yes , but ) My promise does not apply to the transgressors .
And ( remember ) when We made this House ( the Kaba ) a central place for mankind to turn to ( and assemble ) and a sanctuary for peace and ( commanded : ) Make the place where Ibrahim ( Abraham ) stood as a place of Prayer . And We urged Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) : Purify ( cleanse ) My House for those who circumambulate it and those who go into retreat and those who kneel down and prostrate themselves .
And when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) prayed : O my Lord , make it a city of peace and bless its residents with a variety of fruits , ( i . e . ) those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day . ( Allah ) said : And as for him who disbelieves , I shall also grant him enjoyment ( for ) a short span of life , then ( for his disbelief ) shall drive him to the torment of Hell . And that is an extremely evil destination .
And ( recall the time ) when Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) were raising the foundations of the Kaba ( they were praying : ) O our Lord , accept this ( humble service ) from us . You are , indeed , All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
O our Lord ! Make both of us submissive to Your Command ; and raise out of our future generations an Umma ( a Community ) exclusively obedient to You ; and teach us our ways of worship ( and Pilgrimage ) and turn to us ( with Mercy and Forgiveness ) . Verily , it is You Who are Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
O our Lord ! Raise up from among them the ( Last and the Exalted ) Messenger ( i . e . Muhammad blessings and peace be upon him ) , who shall recite to them Your Revelations , and teach them the Book and wisdom ( logic and good judgment , making them Gnostics of the Divine Secret ) and purify and sanctify well ( their hearts and ill - commanding selves ) .
Certainly You alone are the All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) except he who has engaged himself in foolishness . And surely We did choose him in the worldly life and certainly in the Hereafter ( too ) he will be among the high - ranking intimate companions .
And when his Lord commanded him : Bow down ( before Me ) , he submitted : I bow down before the Lord of all the worlds .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) enjoined , by way of will , the same thing upon his sons and ( so did ) Yaqub ( Jacob ) : O my sons , verily , Allah has chosen for you the ( true ) Din ( Religion ) of Islam ) . So , ( come what may ) die not but as Muslims persevering with faith .
Were you present ( at the time ) when death approached Yaqub ( Jacob ) when he asked his sons : Whom will you worship after ( my passing away ) ? They said : We shall worship your God , the God of your ancestors Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Who is the One and Only God ; and we ( all ) shall remain obedient to Him .
They were an Umma ( Community ) who have passed away . They will have what they earned and you will have what you earn . And you will not be questioned about their doings .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : Become Jews or Christians , then you will be guided aright . Say : ( Nay , not so ; ) the truth is that we have embraced the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , far from every falsehood , had turned absolutely to Allah alone . And he was not of the polytheists .
( O Muslims ! ) Say : We believe in Allah and in that ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and ( also ) that which was revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their children and those ( Books ) too which were given to Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus ) and ( likewise ) which were given to other Prophets by their Lord .
We do not make distinction between any of them ( in the matter of faith ) and we have submitted ourselves to Him alone ( the Only , the One God ) .
Then if they ( also ) believe the way you have believed in Him , then they will ( surely ) be guided aright . And if they turn away then ( be clear ) that they are sunk in sheer enmity . So Allah is sufficient to guard you against their evil and He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
( Say that we have taken on the colour from ) Allahs own colour , and whose colour is better than Allahs ? And we worship Him alone .
Say : Do you dispute with us about Allah whereas He is ( not only ) our Lord but your Lord ( too ) ? And ours are our works and yours are your works . And we are truly devoted to Him alone .
( O People of the Book ! ) Do you say that Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their sons were either Jews or Christians ? Say : Who knows better , you or Allah ? And who will be more unjust than he who hides that testimony which is with him ( in the Book ) from Allah . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
That was a community which has passed . For them is what they earned and for you is what you will earn . And you will not be asked about their deeds .
Now the foolish will say : What has turned away these ( Muslims ) from their Qibla ( Bait al - Maqdis in Jerusalem ) to which they used to face ( before ) ? Say : The east and the west ( all ) belong to Allah alone . He guides whom He pleases to the straight path .
And , ( O Muslims , ) in the same way We made you the best Umma ( Community fair to all with a tolerant , moderate and balanced outlook ) so that you may bear witness to the people , and ( Our exalted ) Messenger bears witness to you .
And We appointed the Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , which you used to face before , only to bring to light ( by trial ) who would follow ( Our ) Messenger and who would turn back upon his heels .
And this ( change of Qibla ) was indeed a hard task but not hard for those whom Allah blessed with guidance ( and gnosis of spiritual truths ) . And it is not Allahs Glory to void your faith ( without any reason ) . Allah is surely Most Clement , Ever - Merciful to mankind .
( O Beloved ! ) We have been watching your radiant face turning frequently towards heaven . So We will indeed make you turn towards that Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) which you feel pleased with . So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque right now . And , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it .
And those who have been given the Book definitely know that this ( commandment of changing Qibla ) is the Truth from their Lord .
And Allah is not unaware of the works which they are doing .
And ( even ) if you bring every Sign to the People of the Book , they will not follow your Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , nor will you follow their Qibla .
And do they not follow each others Qibla among themselves .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And if , ( supposing the impossible , ) you ( also ) follow their desires after the knowledge has come to you , then you will surely be of those who wrong ( their own souls ) .
And those to whom We have given the Book recognize ( the Final ) Messenger ( the Venerable Muhammad [ blessing and peace be upon him ] and his glory and majesty ) as they doubtlessly identify their own sons .
But certainly a party of them is concealing the Truth deliberately .
( O Listener ! ) The Truth is from your Lord . So , never be of those who doubt .
And there is for everyone a ( fixed ) direction ( motive ) ; he turns to the same . So , move forward to take the lead towards the pious acts . Wherever you are , Allah will unite you all together . Surely , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) . And this indeed is the Truth from your Lord , and Allah is not unaware of your doings .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) and , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it so that people may not get a chance to raise any objection against you , except those among them who exceed limits . So , fear them not , fear Me alone , so that I complete My blessing on you and you may attain perfection in guidance .
Likewise , We have sent to you ( Our ) Messenger from among yourselves who recites to you Our Revelations and purifies and sanctifies ( your hearts and ill - commanding selves ) and teaches you the Book and inculcates in you logic and wisdom and enlightens you ( on the mysteries of spiritual gnosis and divine truth ) which you did not know .
So remember Me , I shall remember you . And always be thankful to Me and never be ungrateful to Me .
O Believers ! Always seek help ( from Me ) through patience and Prayer . Certainly , Allah is ( always ) with those who observe patience .
And do not say about those who are slain in the cause of Allah that they are dead . ( They are not dead . ) They are rather alive but you have no perception ( of their life ) .
And We will most certainly test you somewhat by means of fear and hunger and certain loss of wealth and lives and fruits . And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who observe patience .
( They are the ones ) who , when afflicted with some distress , say : Indeed , we too are Allahs ( belongings ) and to Him are we to return .
It is they upon whom are bestowed successive blessings and mercy from their Lord . And it is they who are the guided ones .
Verily Safa and Marwa are indeed among the Signs of Allah . So , he who performs Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) or Umra ( Visitation ) of the House of Allah , there is no sin on him if he ambulates ( i . e . walks up and down between ) the two . And if a person does a pious act out of his pleasure , then Allah is certainly Most Appreciative , Well Aware .
Surely , those who conceal the manifest Signs and guidance sent down by Us after We have revealed them clearly for the people in ( Our ) Book , it is they whom Allah curses ( i . e . deprives them of His Mercy ) and whom curse all those also who curse .
But those who repent , mend ( their ) ways and make known ( the Truth ) , so I ( too ) shall forgive them . And I am Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who disbelieved ( by concealing the Truth ) , and left this world while they were disbelievers , upon them is the curse of Allah and of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall be ( held ) under this ( curse ) forever . Their punishment shall not be mitigated . Nor shall they be given respite .
And your God is One God . There is no God but He , the Most Kind , the Ever - Merciful .
Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth , in the alternation of the night and the day , in the ships ( and vessels ) which sail through the ocean carrying cargo , profitable for the people ,
in the ( rain ) water which Allah pours down from the sky reviving therewith the earth to life after its death , ( the earth ) in which He has scattered animals of all kinds , and in the changing wind directions and in the clouds ( that trail ) between the sky and the earth , duty - bound ( under Allahs Command ) certainly ,
( in these ) are ( many ) Signs ( of Allahs Power ) for those who put their reason to work .
And there are some among the people who take others besides Allah as His partners and love them as it is Allahs due alone . But those who believe love Allah the most ( far more intensely than anyone else ) . And if these wrongdoers happen to see that time when the torment ( of the Last Day ) will be before their eyes ( then they will become aware ) that the Master of all the forces is Allah . And certainly Allah is severe in giving punishment .
And when those ( leaders of the disbelievers ) who were followed would be disgusted with their followers and ( they all ) would see ( Allahs ) torment and all their means and resources would be cut off .
And , ( seeing this disgust , the polytheist ) followers will say : Would that we could get a chance ( to return to the world ) , then we ( too ) would turn our backs on them as they have done to us ( today ) . In this way Allah will show them their own deeds as remorse and regret . And ( no way ) shall they be able to escape from Hell .
O Mankind ! Eat of that which is lawful and pure in the earth . And do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . Verily , he is your declared enemy .
He commands you only to do what is evil and immodest and ( also ) that you should say about Allah that which you ( yourselves ) do not know .
And when it is said to them ( the disbelievers ) : Follow that which Allah has sent down , they say : ( Indeed not ! ) We shall rather follow the same ( path ) on which we found our ancestors , even though their ancestors had neither any sense nor any guidance .
The example of inviting these disbelievers ( to guidance ) is like that of a person who calls out to such ( an animal ) as hears nothing except a shout or cry . Deaf , dumb and blind , they have no sense .
O Believers ! Eat of those pure and clean things which We have provided for you and give thanks to Allah if He is the One Whom you worship ( and obey ) .
He has made unlawful for you only the dead animal and blood and the flesh of swine and that animal over which , while sacrificing , the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked . But he who is forced by necessity and is neither disobedient nor transgressor will not incur any sin on himself ( if he eats that much which is required to survive ) . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who conceal ( those verses of the Torah ) which Allah has revealed and take in exchange for that a small price eat nothing but fill their bellies with Fire . And Allah will not even speak to them nor purify them on the Day of Resurrection . And for them is painful torment .
It is they who have purchased error for guidance and torment for forgiveness . What has made them steadfast to bear the Fire ( of Hell ) ?
This is so because Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth . And indeed those who fabricate contradictions ( and antinomies ) in the Book are far ( gone from the Truth ) in rivalry .
Righteousness is not merely that you turn your faces to the East or the West . But true righteousness is that a person believes in Allah , the Last Day , the angels , the Book ( revealed by Allah ) and the Messengers .
Driven by love for Allah , he spends ( his ) wealth on the kindred , orphans , the needy , the wayfarers , and those who ask and in ( liberating slaves ) necks ; and establishes Prayer and pays Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
And when they make a promise , they fulfil it and are steadfast in hardship ( poverty ) and suffering ( ailment ) and at the time of fierce fighting ( Jihad ) .
It is these who are truthful and it is these who are righteous .
O Believers ! Retribution ( the law of equality in punishment ) is prescribed for you in the case of those who are unjustly slain : a free man for a free man , a slave for a slave and a woman for a woman .
Then , if he ( the murderer ) is granted some remission ( in retribution ) by his brother ( the victims heir ) , that should be executed fairly according to the law , and ( retribution ) should be paid ( to the heirs of the slain ) in a graceful manner .
This is a concession and kindness from your Lord . So , anyone who transgresses after that , for him there is painful torment .
And there is a ( guarantee of ) life for you in retribution ( i . e . vengeance of murder ) , O wise people , so that you may guard ( against bloodshed and destruction ) .
It is prescribed for you that when death approaches someone of you and he leaves some property behind , then he is to make a will for ( his ) parents and kindred in a reasonable manner . This is imperative for the true believers .
Then he who alters this ( will ) after hearing it , its sin will be on those who alter it . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So , if a person fears any partiality by a testator ( for someone ) or injustice ( towards some other ) and then he brings about reconciliation among them , it shall be no sin on him . Verily Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for the people before you so that you may become pious .
( These are ) a fixed number of days . So , whoever among you is ill or on a journey , then he shall complete fasting for the fixed number by ( fasting on ) other days . But those who are not able to fast , obligatory on them is to provide food for a needy person in lieu of that . But whoever does ( greater ) good seeking pleasure that is better for him . And your fasting is better for you if you understand .
The month of Ramadan ( is that ) in which the Quran has been sent down as guidance for mankind containing clear Signs which lead ( to the straight road ) and distinguish ( the Truth from falsehood ) . Therefore , he who witnesses this month must fast it , and he who is ill or on a journey should complete the count by ( fasting on equal number of ) other days .
Allah desires ease for you and does not desire hardship for you so that you complete the prescribed number of fasting days , and that you glorify Him for the guidance which He has blessed you with , and that you may become grateful .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when My servants ask you about Me , ( tell them : ) I am near . I reply the call of the supplicant whenever he calls Me out . So they should embrace My obedience and have ( firm ) faith in Me so that they may find the ( coveted ) road ( leading straight to the destination ) .
It is made lawful for you to approach your wives during the nights of the fasts .
They are like clothes for you and you are like clothes for them .
Allah knows that you broke the trust in the case of your own right .
But He has shown Mercy to you and has forgiven you .
So , have sexual relations with them now ( during the nights of the fasts without any inhibition ) and seek what Allah has prescribed for you .
And eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you ( separated ) from the black thread ( of night ) .
Then complete the fast till dusk .
And refrain from having sexual contact with your wives while you are in retreat in the mosques .
These are the bounds ( set ) by Allah . So do not draw near to them ( to step over ) .
Thus Allah explains His Verses ( clearly ) for the people so that they may embrace piety .
And do not eat up one anothers wealth among yourselves through injustice , nor take wealth to the authorities ( as a bribe ) so that , this way , you may ( also ) swallow a portion of others wealth unfairly , while you are aware ( that this is a sin ) .
( O Beloved ! ) People ask you about the new moons . Say : These are Signs to indicate time for the people and for ( determining ) the month of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) . And it is no righteousness that you enter your houses from the rear ( while in Ihram - the sacred dress for Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] ) . In fact righteousness is doing pious acts ( instead of observing such meaningless customs ) . And enter your houses through their ( entrance ) doors , and always fear Allah so that you may prosper .
And fight in the cause of Allah against those who fight against you . ( Yes , ) but do not exceed limits . Surely Allah does not like those who exceed limits .
And ( during war ) kill ( the disbelievers ) wherever you find them , and drive them out from where they drove you out . And rousing mischief and disruption is a severer ( crime ) than killing . But do not fight against them in the proximity of the Sacred Mosque ( Kaba ) unless they themselves fight there against you .
Then if they attack you , kill them , for that is the right penalty of ( such ) disbelievers .
But if they desist , then surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And keep fighting against them until the disruption and mischief is totally eliminated and Din ( the complete system of life and submission ) practically becomes subservient to Allah alone . But if they desist , then offensive action is not permissible except against the wrongdoers .
A sacred month is the requital of a sacred month and ( other ) sacred things also requite one another . So if someone wrongs you , you may also wrong him but proportional to his offense . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah is with those who fear Him .
And spend in the cause of Allah ; and do not cast yourselves into destruction with your own hands ; and adopt righteousness . Verily , Allah loves the righteous .
And accomplish ( the ceremonies of ) Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) and Umra ( Visitation ) for Allah . But if you are prevented ( in the way ) , then ( send for slaughter ) whatever sacrificial animal is available .
And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal has reached its place . But whoever among you is ill or suffers from some ailment of head ( and because of that gets his head shaved before time ) , then he has to recompense ( it ) by ( keeping ) the fast or ( giving ) alms or ( offering ) sacrifice .
Then , when in peaceful condition , anyone of you who takes the advantage of combining Umra ( Visitation ) with Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) should ( offer whatever ) sacrifice is available . However , the one who fails to manage even this has to fast for three days during Hajj ( [ Pilgrimage ] days ) and for seven days on returning from Hajj , making ten days ( fasting ) in all .
This ( relaxation ) is meant for the one whose family does not reside in the vicinity of the Sacred Mosque ( i . e . not a resident of Makka ) . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah gives severe punishment .
Some months are appointed for Hajj ( Pilgrimage : Shawwal , Dhul - Qada and first ten days of Dhul - Hijja ) .
So , he who undertakes to perform Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) during these ( months ) and makes it obligatory ( for himself ) , then he must neither commit sexual intercourse with the women nor any ( other ) sin and nor should he quarrel with anyone during Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) days .
And whatever good you do Allah knows it well .
And collect the provisions required for the journey ( to the Hereafter ) .
And surely the best of provisions is the fear of Allah . So , fear Me , O men of sound judgment !
And it is no sin on you if you seek ( also ) your Lords bounty ( through trade during Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] days ) . Then when you return from Arafat , celebrate the remembrance of Allah near Mashar al - Haram ( Muzdalifa ) . And remember Him as He has guided you . And you were certainly wandering disorientated before .
Then return after going to that very place from where ( the other ) people return . And beg from Allah forgiveness ( earnestly ) . Allah is , of course , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Then , when you have completed the ceremonies of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) , celebrate the remembrance of Allah most fervently ( at Mina ) , as you remember your fathers and forefathers ( with great fondness ) , or remember ( Allah ) even with deeper intensity of fondness . There are some of the people who say : O our Lord , grant us benefits in this ( very ) world . For such there is no share in the Hereafter .
And there are others of them who submit : O our Lord , grant us excellence in this world , and excellence in the Hereafter ( as well ) , and save us from the torment of Hell .
It is they for whom there is a share of their ( virtuous ) earning , and Allah is Swift at reckoning .
And remember Allah ( the most ) during ( these ) numbered days . Then , if someone hastens just in two days ( to return from Mina ) , it is no sin on him and he who delays ( it ) also commits no sin . This is for him who embraces piety . And keep fearing Allah and remember that all of you shall be assembled before Him .
And among people there is also someone whose conversation seems to you pleasing in the life of the world and who calls Allah to witness that which is in his heart , but in truth he is most quarrelsome .
And when he turns away ( from you ) , he runs about in the land to do ( everything possible ) to rouse mischief and destroy crops and life . And Allah does not like mischief and violence .
And when it is said to him ( on account of this tyranny and violence ) : Fear Allah , his arrogance stimulates him for more sins . Hell is , therefore , sufficient for him . And that is indeed an evil abode .
And ( on the contrary ) among people there is also someone who sells even his life to attain the pleasure of Allah . And Allah is Most Kind to the servants .
O Believers ! Enter Islam perfectly and wholly and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . He is certainly your declared enemy .
And if you err even after Our clear Signs have come to you , then bear in mind that Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
Are they waiting only for ( the torment of ) Allah to come in the coverings of clouds , and also the angels ( to descend ) , and the ( whole ) affair is settled ? And to Allah will all matters be returned .
Ask the Children of Israel how many a Clear Sign We gave them ! But he who alters Allahs Bounty after it has reached him then Allah surely inflicts severe torment .
The worldly life has been quite adorned and beautified for the disbelievers . And they make fun of the believers . But those who have embraced God - wariness will rank far superior to them on the Day of Resurrection . And Allah gives without measure to whom He wills .
( In the beginning ) all the people agreed upon the same Din ( Religion . Later , when differences emerged among them , ) Allah sent His Messengers as Bearers of good news and Warners and sent down with them the Book based on Truth , so that it might judge those matters among the people in which they had developed differences .
Then only those very people whom the Book was given differed about it , despite the fact that the clear Signs had come to them .
( And they differed also ) because of mere jealousy and malice among themselves .
Then Allah , by His Command , made the believers understand that matter of Truth about which they had differed .
And Allah guides whom He pleases to the straight road .
Do you think that you will enter Paradise ( for nothing , without any trial , ) while you have not yet undergone the predicament of those who passed away before you ? They were afflicted with a diversity of sufferings and hardships and were jolted ( in such a manner ) that the Messenger ( himself ) and his Companions of faith ( too ) cried out : When will the help of Allah arrive ? Beware ! The help of Allah is definitely at hand .
They ask you what they should spend ( in the way of Allah ) . Say : Whatever wealth you spend ( is right ) , but the deserving ones are your parents , and near relatives , and orphans , and the needy and the wayfarers . And whatever good you do , Allah indeed knows it full well .
Fighting ( for the cause of Allah ) has been made incumbent upon you although you are averse to it by temperament . It may be that you dislike a thing and ( in fact ) that is good for you . And it is ( also ) likely that you like a thing but ( in fact ) that is bad for you . And Allah knows well but you do not know .
They ask you about the command for fighting in the Sacred Month . Say : Fighting in it is a grave sin but hindering people from Allahs path and denying Him and obstructing them from al - Masjid al - Haram ( Kaba ) and turning its dwellers out of it is yet a graver sin ( than that ) in the sight of Allah . And this mischief - mongering is even worse than bloodshed .
( These disbelievers ) will continue fighting against you endlessly till they turn you back from your Din ( Religion ) if they become capable to gain ( the required ) might .
And whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) and dies as a disbeliever , ( all ) deeds of such people will become void in this world and in the Hereafter .
And it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They shall live in it forever .
Indeed those who believed and migrated for the sake of Allah and struggled hard in the way of Allah , it is they who look forward to Allahs Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
They ask you about liquor and gambling . Say : Major sin lies in both of them and also some ( worldly ) profit for the people but their sin is greater than their profit . And they also ask you about what they should spend . Say : ( Spend ) whatever is surplus to your needs . Thus does Allah make His Commandments clear to you so that you may meditate .
( Your meditation should be ) on ( matters relating to ) this world and the Hereafter . And they ask you about orphans . Say : It is meritorious to set ( their affairs ) right . And if you associate them with yourselves ( in subsistence and business ) , then they are also your brothers . And Allah distinctly recognizes the one who is destructive from the other who is constructive . And if Allah willed , He would put you in distress . Verily Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And do not marry idolatrous women until they become Muslims . Indeed a Muslim slave - girl is better than a ( free ) idolatress , however pleasing she may seem to you . Nor give ( the Muslim women ) in marriage to idolaters till they embrace Islam . And certainly a Muslim slave is better than an idolater , even though he should please you . These ( idolaters and disbelievers ) call you to Hell while Allah invites , by His Decree , to Paradise and Forgiveness and explains His Verses clearly to people so that they may take direction and guidance .
And they ask you about menstruation ( monthly course ) . Say : It is filth ; so keep away from women during menstruation and do not approach them until they become pure . And when they have washed themselves clean , consort with them the way by which Allah has permitted you . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who repent excessively , and He loves those who keep themselves thoroughly pure and clean .
Your wives are for you like a harvest producing field . So , go to your field as you may desire . And manage some provisions for yourselves for the next world . Inculcate in yourselves Allahs fear and be mindful that you have to appear before Him . And , ( O Beloved , ) give good news to the believers ( that their appearance before Allah will be gainful for them ) .
And because of your oaths , do not use ( the Name of ) Allah as an excuse for refraining from doing good ( to the people ) , becoming God - fearing and making peace among people . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah will not hold you accountable for your vain oaths but will take you to task for the oaths taken with serious intention in your hearts . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
And for those who swear not to go near their wives , there is a ( reconsideration ) period of four months . So , if ( during this period ) they resume their relations , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
But if they resolve firmly to divorce , then certainly Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And the divorced women shall hold back themselves till three menstrual cycles . And it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah may have created in their wombs , if they believe in Allah and the Last Day . And during this period , their husbands have a greater right to take them back ( again ) into conjugal bond , provided they intend to reconcile .
And , according to usage , women too have rights over men similar to the rights of men over women .
Men , however , have an advantage over them . And Allah is All - Mighty , Most Wise .
Divorce is ( revocable ) two times ( only ) . Then either retain ( the wife ) with honour ( in marital relationship ) or release her with kindness . And it is not lawful for you to take back anything of that which you have given them , unless both fear that ( now by maintaining marital ties ) they may not be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
So if you fear that both will be unable to keep within Allahs limits , then ( in that case ) there shall be no sin upon either of them if the wife ( herself ) may give up something as recompense to free herself ( from this distressing bond ) .
These are the limits ( set ) by Allah . So , do not exceed them . And those who exceed the limits prescribed by Allah , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Then if he divorces ( for the third time ) , she will not be lawful for him until she marries some husband other than him .
But if he ( the latter ) also divorces her , in such case there shall be no sin on both of them ( the former husband and the wife ) if they return ( once more to the wedlock ) , provided both of them ( now ) think that they would be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
These are the limits ( prescribed ) by Allah which He explains to those who have knowledge .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then either retain them ( in marital bond ) in a graceful manner or release them nicely .
But do not retain them to hurt so that you subject ( them ) to excesses .
And he who does so wrongs his own soul .
And do not make fun of Allahs Commands .
And call to mind Allahs favour that has been ( bestowed ) upon you and the Book that He has sent down to you and ( the pearls of ) wisdom ( on which He has enlightened you ) .
He advises you ( by means of this code of conduct ) .
And fear Allah and bear in mind that Allah is indeed All - Knowing .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then do not prevent them from remarrying ( their former or latter ) husbands when they have mutually agreed according to the Islamic Law . This is a direction for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day . It is most pure , clean and wholesome for you . And Allah knows and you do not know ( so many things ) .
And the mothers shall suckle their infants for two full years . This ( injunction ) is for him who wants to complete the suckling period .
According to usage , the food and clothing of the feeding mothers is the obligation of the father of the child .
No soul should be stressed beyond its capacity ( and ) neither the mother nor the father should be harmed for the child .
The same injunction is applicable to the heirs .
Then if the mother and the father both desire with mutual consultation and consent to wean ( even before the fixed two years ) there will be no sin on them .
Nor shall it be a sin if you intend to engage ( a wet nurse ) for suckling the child , while you pay them whatever you do according to usage .
And fear Allah and know that Allah is watchful of all that you do .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind shall keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days . So , when they arrive at ( the end of ) their waiting term , there shall be no responsibility on you for whatever they do for themselves according to Islamic Law . And Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
And there is no sin on you if ( even during the waiting term ) you convey to such women a hint of marriage proposal or conceal ( this idea ) in your hearts . Allah knows that you will soon mention to them but do not seek from them any ( such ) promise even secretly , except that you say to them ( a hint of ) that according to Islamic Law . And do not resolve firmly on wedlock ( during this time ) until the prescribed waiting term is over . And know that Allah also knows what is in your hearts . So fear Him persistently . And ( also ) know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Lenient .
There will ( also ) be no sin on you if you divorce ( the wedlocked ) women even before touching them or fixing their dower . Then ( in this case ) provide for them appropriately . It is ( an obligation ) for the rich according to his means and for the poor according to his means . ( In any case ) this provision must be made in a becoming manner . This is compulsory for the pious .
And if you divorce them before you have touched them after you have fixed a dower for them , then paying half of the dower you have fixed is necessary , unless they forgo ( their right ) themselves , or the ( husband ) in whose hand is the marriage tie forgoes ( i . e . pays more than half or full ) . And , ( O male folk , ) if you forgo , that is closer to God - wariness . And never forget extending generosity ( and behaving excellently ) towards each other ( even in these moments of stress and strain ) . Verily , Allah observes well what you do .
Guard strictly all the Prayers , especially the middle prayer . And stand before Allah as an epitome of submissiveness and lowliness .
Should you be in a state of fear , then ( do offer Prayer ) whether on foot or while riding ( as the case may be ) , but once you get back to peace , remember Allah in the manner He has taught you which you did not know ( before ) .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind must leave a will for their widows ( before they die ) to provide them for their maintenance for one year ( and ) not to turn them out of their houses .
But if they themselves walk out ( on their own ) then there is no sin on you for whatever they may do for themselves according to usage . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And the divorced women must also be provided with maintenance according to what is fair . This is compulsory for the pious .
Thus Allah makes His Commandments clear to you so that you may understand .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the people who went out of their houses fearing death though they were in thousands ? Allah commanded them : Die , ( and they died ) . Then He restored them to life . Surely Allah is Most Bountiful towards mankind , but most of them do not give ( Him ) thanks .
And , ( O Muslims , ) fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Who is he that will lend to Allah a generous loan ? He will , then , multiply it for him manifold . And Allah it is Who decreases and increases ( your sustenance ) and towards Him will you be returned .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the group of the Children of Israel who came after Musa ( Moses ) ?
When they said to their Prophet : Appoint for us a king so that we may fight in the cause of Allah ( under his command ) ,
the Prophet said ( to them ) : What , if you desist from fighting once it is prescribed for you !
They said : What ails us that we should not fight in the cause of Allah when we have been driven away from our homes and children ?
But when fighting was made obligatory for them , all of them turned away , except a few .
And Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And their Prophet said to them : Allah has appointed for you Talut ( Saul ) as a king .
They said : How can he reign over us whereas we have greater right than him to rule , and he has also not been granted affluence .
( The Prophet ) said : Surely Allah has chosen him above you , and has given him more affluent knowledge and vigour ;
and Allah ( entrusts ) with His kingdom whom He pleases and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And their Prophet said to them : The sign of his kingdom ( to be Allahs bestowal ) is that a box , carried by angels , shall come to you from your Lord , containing things for tranquillity of heart , and some sacred relics left behind by children of Musa and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) . Surely there is in it a great sign for you if you are believers .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) marched out of the city with his troops , he said : Surely , Allah will try you by means of a stream . So he who drinks from it will not be ( of my companions ) , and he who does not drink it will be of ( my party ) , but if someone takes ( only ) a sip of it from the hollow of his hand , ( there is no harm ) .
Yet , they all drank of it except a few .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) and his companions in faith crossed the stream they said : We have no strength today to face Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces .
( But ) those who were sure that ( after martyrdom or death ) they were going to meet Allah said : Many a time a small party has overcome a ( very ) large party by the Command of Allah ! And Allah awards His companionship to the steadfast .
And when they faced Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces , they supplicated Allah : O our Lord , grant us plentiful patience and make our steps firm and give us victory over the disbelievers .
So they defeated them ( the army of Jalut [ Goliath ] ) by Allahs Command and Dawud ( David ) killed Jalut . And Allah granted ( Dawud ) sovereignty and wisdom and taught him what He wished . If Allah had not removed one group by means of another , ( the human life on ) earth would have been ruined ( due to persistent suppression and oppression by tyrants ) . But Allah is Bountiful to all the worlds .
These are Allahs Verses . ( O Beloved ! ) We recite them to you with the Truth and indeed you are of the Messengers .
Of all these Messengers ( whom We sent ) We have exalted some above others : Allah spoke to some of them ( directly ) , and raised some ( above all others ) in rank ( i . e . elevated the Holy Prophet [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] to the highest of all the degrees of the glory of Messengership ) . And We gave Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , clear Signs and helped him with the Holy Spirit .
And had Allah so willed , the people succeeding these Messengers would never have disputed and fought among themselves , after the manifest Signs had come to them . But they differed ( owing to the free will which was endowed to them to be answerable before Allah for their performance ) . So , some of them believed while others opted to disbelieve .
( And keep it in mind that ) if Allah had willed ( i . e . restricted their choice to one opinion only ) they would never have fought among themselves . But Allah does what He desires .
O Believers ! Spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of whatever We have provided for you , before the Day comes when there will be no trading ; and ( for disbelievers ) neither any friendship ( will be useful ) nor ( any ) intercession ; and it is the disbelievers who are the transgressors .
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , the Self - Subsisting , the One Who sustains and protects ( the entire universe with His Strategy ) . He is seized by neither slumber nor sleep . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Him alone . Who can dare intercede with Him except by His permission ? ( He ) knows all that is ( happening or has happened ) before the Creation and all that is ( about to happen ) after them ; and they cannot encompass anything of His knowledge except that which He wills . His Throne ( of Empire and Power and Authority ) encompasses the heavens and the earth , and the protection of both ( the earth and the heavens ) does not pose Him any difficulty . He alone is Most High , Most Great .
There is no compulsion in Din ( Religion ) . Surely the guidance has been evidently distinguished from error . So he who rejects false gods and believes in Allah has grasped such a firm handhold that will never ( possibly ) give way . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah is the Guardian of the believers . He brings them out of ( all kinds of ) darkness and takes them towards the light . And those who are disbelievers , their supporters are satans who take them out of the light ( of Truth ) into the darkness ( of evil ) . It is they who are the inmates of Hell . They will stay there forever .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen him who began to dispute with Ibrahim ( Abraham ) about his own Lord because Allah had given him kingdom ? When Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord is He Who gives life and ( also ) causes death , ( the king ) said ( in reply ) : I ( too ) give life and cause death . Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Surely , Allah causes the sun to rise in the east ; bring it up from the west . So , the infidel was stunned . And Allah does not guide the transgressors to the right path .
Or , likewise , ( have you not seen ) him who passed by a town which was a wreck with its roofs caved in ? He said : How shall Allah bring it back to life after its death ? So ( to make him witness His Power ) Allah kept him dead for a hundred years , then gave him life , ( and after that ) asked : How long ( have ) you stayed here ( after dying ) ?
He said : I stayed for a day or ( only ) part of a day . Allah said : ( Nay , ) you kept lying for a hundred years . So , ( now ) look at ( the provisions of ) your food and drink . ( They ) have not even decomposed ( i . e . become stale ) . And ( now ) see your donkey ( whose very bones are no more intact ) .
And this is because We may make you a Sign ( of Our Might ) for the people . And ( now ) see ( these ) bones how We stir ( and raise ) them and clothe them with flesh . When this ( phenomenon ) fully dawned on him , he proclaimed : I have learnt ( through the eye of certitude ) that Allah is indeed All - Powerful to do everything .
And ( also recall the event ) when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord , show me how You bring the dead to life . Allah said : Do you not have faith ? He submitted : Why not ! ( I do believe , ) but ( I wish ) my heart is blessed with gratifying calm . Allah ordained : Well , take four birds and tame them to feel attached to you ; then ( slaughter them and ) place a piece of each of them on each hill ; then call them . They will come to you at high speed . And know that surely Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like ( that ) grain out of which seven ears shoot forth . ( And then ) each ear bears a hundred grains ( i . e . they are rewarded seven hundred times ) . And Allah multiplies ( still more ) for whom He likes . And Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah , and then do not follow up their spending by reminding of their benevolence or by hurting , there is reward for them with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
Polite conversation ( with the needy ) and extending tolerance are far better than charity followed by injuring ( his ) heart . And Allah is Self - Sufficient , Forbearing .
O Believers ! Do not ruin your charity donations ( later ) by taunts of doing favour and hurting feelings like the one who gives charity to show off his wealth to the people and believes in neither Allah nor the Last Day . His case is like a smooth rock covered with a thin coat of soil . Then heavy rain falls on it , washes it clean and leaves it ( the same ) bare and hard ( rock ) . So these ( pretentious people ) shall get nothing out of their earning . And Allah does not guide the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to seek Allahs pleasure and stabilize themselves ( in faith and obedience ) are like a garden located on a higher ground level . When a heavy rain falls on it , it doubles its yield . And if it does not receive a heavy rain then even dew ( or drizzle ) is sufficient . And Allah monitors your actions minutely .
Would anyone of you like to have a garden of date - palms and grapevines with streams flowing beneath it and all kinds of fruit ( in addition to dates and grapes ) ; and ( under these conditions ) old age overtakes him while his children are ( still ) tender ; and ( in the meanwhile ) the garden is struck with a whirlwind composed ( entirely ) of fire and gets burnt ? ( Imagine the state of his helplessness , agony and anxiety . ) Thus Allah makes clear His Signs for you so that you may reflect . ( So , do you wish that the orchard of your deeds should also burn to ashes in the fire of pretentiousness on the Last Day and there should be none to support you ? )
O Believers ! Spend ( in the way of Allah ) of your lawful and clean earnings and of that which We bring forth for you from the earth . And do not intend to spend ( in the cause of Allah ) from that which is unclean , for ( if the same is given to you ) you yourself would never accept it without closing your eyes to it . And you mustknow that Allah is certainly All - Sufficient , Worthy of All Praise .
Satan makes you afraid of poverty ( to stop you from spending in the way of Allah ) and enjoins you to commit indecency . And Allah promises you His forgiveness and bounty . And Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He blesses with wisdom whom He wills . And he who is granted wisdom ( and reason ) receives tremendous good . And only those who are endowed with wisdom and insight receive direction and guidance .
And whatever you spend or whatever you vow to offer , Allah verily knows it and the evildoers have no helpers .
If you give charity in public , it is worthwhile ( for it will persuade others ) , but if you hide and deliver it to the poor in secret that is ( far ) better for you . And Allah will remove from you some of your sins ( due to this charity ) . And Allah is Aware of all that you do .
Their ( acceptance ) of guidance is not your responsibility . It is Allah Who awards guidance whom He wills . And whatever wealth you give away ( as charity donation ) goes to your own benefit . It is not appropriate for you to spend but for Allahs pleasure alone . And whatever you spend of your wealth , ( its reward ) will be paid back to you in full and you shall not be treated unjustly .
( Charity is ) the right of those poor who have been restricted ( from earning their livelihood ) in the cause of Allah . They cannot even move about in the land ( due to their whole time involvement in matters of Din [ Religion ] ) . Because of their ( ascetic ) aversion to greed , the unwise ( knowing little about their state of heart and soul ) consider them wealthy . You will recognize them from their appearance . They do not ask people ( for help ) at all lest they should humble themselves ( before them ) . And whatever wealth you give in charity , Allah indeed knows it well .
Those who spend ( in the cause of Allah ) privately or publicly , by night and day , have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall neither fear nor grieve .
Those who live on usury will not be able to stand ( on the Day of Judgment ) but like the one whom Satan has made insane with his touch ( damnation ) . This is because they used to say that trade ( buying and selling ) is similar to usury whereas Allah has declared trading ( buying and selling ) lawful and usury unlawful . So , if someone refrained ( from usury ) on receiving admonition from his Lord , then he can keep whatever he took in the past and his case is with Allah . But those who continued with usury ( despite the admonition ) would be the inmates of Hell . There will they stay permanently .
Allah eliminates usury ( i . e . deprives usurious profits of prosperous growth ) and multiplies alms gifts ( i . e . increases blessings of clean wealth manifold through charity donations ) . And Allah does not like anyone who is ungrateful and disobedient .
Surely those who believe and do pious acts and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Last Day ) they will neither fear nor grieve .
O Believers ! Fear Allah and write off whatever balance remains of usury if you are believers ( true to the core of your hearts ) .
But if you do not do so , then stand red - alert on the declaration of war from Allah and His Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And if you repent , then your principal amounts are ( lawfully ) yours . Do not wrong and be not wronged .
If a debtor is under financial stress , he should be given respite till he feels at ease to pay . And your forgoing ( the loan ) is better for you if you know ( what significance it has in the sight of Allah to console the poor ) .
And fear the Day when you will be returned to Allah . Then everyone will be paid in full for whatever he has done and they will not be wronged .
O Believers ! Whenever you strike deals with one another for a fixed period , reduce the transaction to writing .
And the scribe amongst you should write it with justice and should not refuse to write as Allah has taught him to write .
So he should write ( i . e . he should meet the requirements of documentation with utmost honesty , in accordance with the law of the land ) .
And he on whom the liability ( i . e . debt ) falls should dictate the contents of the contract .
And he should fear Allah , Who is his Sustainer , and ( while writing ) he should not diminish anything ( from the indebted sum ) .
Then if he who has undertaken the liability is mentally deficient or physically weak or lacks the ability to dictate the contents , his guardian should dictate with fairness .
And get two witnesses out of your own men . But if two men are not available then a man and two women : ( they ) should be from among those whom you like as witnesses ( i . e . consider trustworthy ) , so that if either of the two women forgets , the other may remind her .
And the witnesses should not refuse whenever they are called ( for evidence ) . And do not be weary of writing it down for its term whether the transaction is small or large .
This documentation by you is more just in the sight of Allah , and makes evidence more solid and nearer to keeping you from doubt , except that if transactions are hand - to - hand which you carry out among yourselves then there is no sin on you if you do not write it down .
And take witnesses whenever you bargain among yourselves .
And let no harm be done to either the scribe or the witness , but if you do so , it will be sheer disobedience on your part .
And keep fearing Allah . And Allah grants you knowledge of ( principles of mutual dealing ) and Allah knows everything well .
And if you are on a journey and do not find a scribe , then take possession of a pledge in mortgage . Then , if one of you trusts the other , so he whose honesty has been trusted should deliver his trust and fear Allah Who provides him subsistence . And do not conceal evidence . And the one who conceals it , his heart is certainly sinful . And Allah knows well whatever you do .
Whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah . Whether you reveal or conceal the secrets of your heart , Allah will call you to account for that . Then Allah shall forgive whom He desires and torment whom He desires . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
( He ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) believed in ( i . e . affirmed ) what was revealed to him by his Lord and so did the believers . All embraced faith ( from the core of their hearts ) in Allah , His angels , His Books and His Messengers . ( They also say : ) We do not differentiate between any of His Messengers ( in believing ) . And they submit ( before His Holy Presence ) : We have heard ( Your Command ) and ( accepted to ) obey . O our Lord ! We seek Your forgiveness and to You ( we all ) have to return .
Allah does not put under stress any soul more than its endurance . There is a reward for whatever good it has earned and there is torment for whatever evil it has perpetrated . O our Lord , do not take us to task if we forget or do some mistake . O our Lord , lay not on us such a ( heavy ) burden as You laid on those before us . O our Lord , put not on us ( also ) the burden that we have not the strength to bear , and overlook ( our sins ) , and forgive us and have mercy on us . You alone are our Master and Helper . So grant us victory over the disbelievers .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , Self - Subsisting and Sustainer ( of the entire universe with His Strategy ) .
( O Beloved ! ) He is the One Who has revealed to you ( this ) Book with Truth . ( It ) confirms ( all those Books ) that were revealed before it . And He is the One Who has revealed the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) .
( As the Books were revealed ) before this to guide the people , He has ( now , in like manner , ) revealed ( the Quran , ) the Criterion to distinguish right from wrong . Verily those who deny Allahs Revelations for them is rigorous punishment . And Allah is Almighty , the Lord of Retribution .
Surely , nothing is hidden from Allah in the earth or in the heaven .
He is the One Who shapes your forms the way He desires in the wombs ( of mothers ) . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
He is the One Who has revealed to you the Book comprising some firm and solid Verses ( i . e . literally clear and precise in meaning ) ; they are the foundation of ( commandments ) of the Book . And other Verses are figurative ( i . e . containing abstract and allusive meaning ) . So , those who have deviation in their hearts follow only its figurative Verses ( just ) under the urge to create disruption and with the motive to supply them self - seeking interpretation instead of their true interpretation . But none knows its true interpretation apart from Allah . And those who are perfectly firm in knowledge say : We believe in it . The whole ( Book ) has been revealed by our Lord . And direction and guidance is the share of only those who possess wisdom and insight .
( And they submit : ) O our Lord , let not our hearts deviate after You have honoured us with guidance and grant us Mercy especially from Your Presence . Truly You alone are the Great Bestower .
O Our Lord ! You will surely bring together mankind on the Day about which there is no doubt . Verily , Allah does not go against ( His ) promise .
Indeed those who reject faith , neither their wealth nor their children shall be able to save them anyway from ( the torment of ) Allah . It is they who are the fuel of Hell .
( Their ) line of action ( also ) resembles that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them who belied Our Revelations . So , Allah seized them because of their sins and Allah gives severe punishment .
Say to the disbelievers : You will soon be overpowered and driven towards Hell , and that is a very evil abode .
There is certainly a sign for you in the two parties that encountered each other ( in the battlefield of Badr ) one party fought in the cause of Allah and the other comprised the disbelievers . They saw them with their ( own ) eyes as twice their own number . And Allah provides strength with His reinforcement whom He likes . In this incident there is surely a ( notable ) lesson of warning for those who have eyes .
( Excessively ) attractive has been made , for the people , the love of lusts ( that ) include women , children , and hoarded treasures of gold and silver , and branded horses and cattle and crops . ( All ) this is the provision of the worldly life and with Allah is the best abode .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : Shall I give you the news of something far better than all this ? ( Yes , ) for the Godfearing there are ( such ) gardens with their Lord beneath which streams flow . They will live there forever . There will be ( for them ) chaste wives , and ( above all ) they shall enjoy the pleasure of Allah . And Allah monitors His servants well .
( These are the people ) who say : O our Lord , we have surely believed , so , forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of Hell .
( They are ) steadfast ( people ) , truthful in their words and deeds and submissive in devotion and obedience . And they spend in the way of Allah , and ( rise ) in the later hours of the night to implore Allahs pardon .
Allah bears witness that none is worthy of worship apart from Him ; and the angels and those who possess knowledge also bear testimony to it ( as well as the fact ) that He designs and executes every plan with justice . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
Truly , Islam is the only Din ( Religion ) in Allahs sight . And the people of the Book disagreed , after knowledge had come to them , only on account of their mutual jealousy and contention . And he who denies Allahs revelations , then surely Allah hastens in calling to account .
( O Beloved ! ) If they , even then , have a row with you , say to them : I have bowed my humble face in absolute submissiveness before the Presence of Allah and so have done those who follow me . And say to the people of the Book as well as the illiterate ones : Do you also bow before Allah ( i . e . do you accept Islam ) ? Then if they embrace submission then they have truly achieved guidance . But if they turn away , your responsibility is only to deliver the command . And Allah is Watchful of His servants .
Certainly those who deny Revelations of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly , and also kill those of the people who enjoin equity and justice , so announce to them the news of a grievous torment .
They are the ones whose works have become void both in this world and in the Hereafter . And they shall have no helpers .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of ( the knowledge of ) the Book ? They are invited towards the Book of Allah , so that it ( the Book ) gives judgment ( on disputes ) among them . Then , a party of them turn away and it is they who deviate .
This ( courage to deviate ) is because they say : The Fire of Hell will not touch us except for a few numbered days . And the lies that they invent ( about Allah ) have deluded them with regard to their Din ( Religion ) .
So , what will be their plight when We shall assemble all of them together on the Day in ( the happening of ) which there is no doubt and everyone will be paid back in full for whatever ( deeds ) he has earned , and no injustice will be done to them .
( O My Beloved ! ) Submit ( like this ) : O Allah , Lord of Sovereignty ! You bestow sovereignty on whom You will and You take away sovereignty from whom You will . You confer honour on whom You will and You dishonour whom You will . All good is in Your Mighty Hand and surely You have Absolute Authority and Control over everything .
You make the night enter into the day and You make the day enter into the night and You bring the living out of the dead and You bring the dead out of the living and You bless ( with Your Bounties ) without measure whom You wish .
The Muslims should not make friends with disbelievers instead of Muslims . And whoever does so will have nothing of ( the alliance with ) Allah except that you seek protection ( from their mischief ) . And Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and to Allah is the return .
Say : Whether you hide what is in your breasts or make it known , Allah knows it and He thoroughly knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . And Allah has Mighty Control over everything .
On the Day when every soul shall find present ( before him ) every good that he accomplished and every evil that he perpetrated , he will wish there were a great distance between him and that evil ( or that Day ) . Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and Allah is Most Compassionate towards His servants .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : If you love Allah , follow me . Allah will then take you as ( His ) beloved and forgive your sins for you , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : Obey Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) . But if they turn away then Allah does not like the disbelievers .
Verily , Allah chose Adam , and Nuh ( Noah ) , and the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the family of Imran ( in dignity ) above all the people of the world .
They are all one race , descendants of one another . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( recall ) when the wife of Imran said : O my Lord , I vow purely to You what is in my womb , freeing him ( from other obligations ) . So , accept ( this offering ) from me . You are indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So when she delivered a baby girl , she submitted : Lord , I have given birth but to a female child . But Allah knew best what she had given birth to . ( She said : ) And the boy ( that I prayed for ) could never ( be ) like the girl ( that Allah has blessed me with ) ; and I have named her Maryam ( Mary , the worshipper ) ; and surely I commit her and her children to Your protection against ( the mischief of ) Satan , the outcast .
So , her Lord graciously accepted her ( Maryam [ Mary ] ) with excellent acceptance and brought her up immaculately and entrusted her guardianship to Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) . Every time Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) entered her chamber of worship he found with her ( novel and uncommon ) food items . He inquired : O Maryam , wherefrom have these things come for you ? She replied : This ( sustenance ) comes from Allah . Verily , Allah provides sustenance without measure to whom He desires .
At the same place Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) supplicated his Lord . He submitted : O my Lord , bless me , out of Your Grace , with a virtuous and pure offspring . Surely You alone hear the supplication .
While he was still standing in the chamber offering the Prayer ( or supplicating ) , the angels called out to him : Indeed , Allah gives you the good news of ( a son ) Yahya ( John ) , who shall confirm the Word from Allah ( i . e . Isa [ Jesus ] ) and he will be a leader , well - protected against ( temptation for ) women and a Prophet from among ( Our ) exceptionally pious servants .
( Zakariyya ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when old age has already overtaken me and my wife is ( also ) barren ? He said : The same way as Allah does whatever He wills .
Zakariyya submitted : O my Lord , fix a sign for me . Allah said : The sign for you is that for three days you will not be able to communicate to the people except by gestures . And remember your Lord excessively and glorify Him persistently evening and morning .
And when the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely Allah has chosen you and has blessed you with purity and has exalted you today over all the women of the world .
O Maryam ( Mary ) ! Obey your Lord consistently with utmost humbleness , prostrate yourself and bow down in worship along with those who bow down .
( O Beloved ! ) These are news of the Unseen which We reveal to you . But ( at that time ) you were not present with them when they were casting their pens ( by way of a draw to determine ) which of them should take care of Maryam ( Mary ) . Nor were you with them when they were disputing with one another .
When the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely , Allah gives you glad tidings of a ( particular ) Word from Him named the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , who would be eminent and exalted ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter and would be of those who are exceptionally intimate servants of Allah blessed with His nearness .
And he will talk to the people ( alike ) both in the cradle and in ripe years , and he will be one of the pious servants ( of Allah ) .
Maryam ( Mary ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when no man has ever touched me ? He said : Just as Allah creates what He pleases . When He decides ( to do ) some work , He just gives it the Command Be , and it becomes .
And Allah will teach him the Book and the Wisdom , the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] everything ) .
And he will be a Messenger to the Children of Israel , ( saying to them : ) I have undoubtedly brought to you a Sign from your Lord : I design for you from clay ( a figure ) like the shape of a bird ; then I breathe into it ; and at once it becomes a flying bird by Allahs Command . And I restore to health the born blind , and the lepers , and raise the dead to life by the Command of Allah . And I inform you of ( all ) what you have eaten and what you have hoarded in your houses . Truly , there is a Sign in it for you if you believe .
And I validate the ( Book ) Torah sent down before me , and that is because I may declare certain things lawful for you which were forbidden to you as unlawful . And I have come to you from your Lord with a Sign . So , fear Allah and obey me .
Verily , Allah is my Lord and your Lord too . So worship Him alone . This is the straight path .
Later , when Isa ( Jesus ) sensed their disbelief , he said : Who are my helpers in the way of Allah ? His sincere companions submitted : We are the helpers of ( Din [ the religion ] of ) Allah . We have believed in Allah and bear witness that we are surely Muslims .
O our Lord ! We have believed in the Book which You have sent down and we have become the followers of this Messenger . So register us among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
Then , the disbelieving ( Jews ) conspired secretly ( to execute Isa [ Jesus ] ) but Allah covertly designed His plan ( to safeguard Isa [ Jesus ] ) . And Allah is the Best of secret planners .
When Allah said : O Isa ( Jesus ) , I will surely bring your term of life to completion ; and I am about to lift you towards Myself ( in the heavens ) , and deliver you from the disbelievers , and exalt your followers above ( these ) disbelievers till the Day of Resurrection . Then to Me you all have to return . So I shall judge between you in the matters about which you used to dispute .
As for those who disbelieved , I shall give them severe punishment ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter , and they shall have no helpers .
And those who believed and did pious deeds , ( Allah ) shall reward them in full . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
These which We read out to you are Signs and the wisdom - laden advice .
Surely the example of Isa ( Jesus ) in the sight of Allah is the same as that of Adam whom He formed from clay , then said ( to him ) : Be . He became .
( Ordained to forewarn the Umma [ the Community ] : ) This is the Truth from your Lord , so be not of those who doubt .
So , if someone contends with you about Isa ( Jesus ) after knowledge has come to you , say : Come , let us ( jointly ) call our sons and your sons , our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves ( at the same place ) . Then we supplicate fervently ( i . e . most submissively ) and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars .
Most certainly , this is the true narrative and there is none worthy of worship except Allah . And verily Allah it is Who is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
But if they turn away , then surely Allah knows the miscreants full well .
Say : O People of the Book , come to that matter which is common between us and you ( namely that ) : we shall worship none other than Allah , and we shall not associate any partner with Him . Nor shall anyone of us take one another as Lords apart from Allah . Then if they turn away , say : Bear witness that we are but Allahs obedient servants ( Muslims ) .
O People of the Book ! Why do you dispute about Ibrahim ( [ Abraham ] i . e . why do you regard him as a Jew or a Christian ] ) ? The truth is that the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] on which both your religions are based ) were sent down after his time . Have you not even ( this much ) sense ?
Listen ! You are the people who have also been disputing about matters of which you had ( but some ) knowledge . But why do you dispute about things of which you have no knowledge ( at all ) ? And Allah knows but you do not know .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was neither a Jew nor a Christian ; he was a ( true ) Muslim , far detached from all heresy and falsehood . Nor was he one of the polytheists .
Certainly the nearest of the people to Ibrahim , ( and the most deserving ) are those who have followed him ( in his Din [ Religion ] ) . And ( they ) are no other than this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those who have believed ( in him ) . And Allah is the Helper of the believers .
( O Muslims ! ) A section of the People of the Book ( intensely ) desire to , somehow , lead you astray but they have led astray only themselves while they have no sense ( of it ) .
O People of the Book ! Why are you denying Allahs Revelations while you bear witness yourselves ( i . e . you have read everything in your Books ) ?
O People of the Book ! Why do you confound the Truth with falsehood and why do you hide the Truth whereas you know ?
And a section of the People of the Book say ( to the people ) : Believe in the Book ( Quran ) which is sent down to Muslims at dawn ( in the morning ) and deny it in the evening , so that , ( imitating you , ) they may also desert and turn about .
And do not believe anyone but him who follows ( only ) your Din ( Religion ) . Say : Surely , the guidance is but the guidance of Allah ( alone ) . ( And they further say to their people never to believe even this ) that : The like of the Book ( or Din ) given to you may also be given to anyone else or that someone may give a plea against you before your Lord . Say : Bounty is in the Hand of Allah . He bestows on whom He pleases and Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He specifies to His Mercy whom He desires and Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty .
And among the People of the Book there are a type that if you trust him with a heap of wealth , he will return it to you . And some among them are such that if you trust him with one dinar ( a gold coin ) , he will not return it to you unless you keep standing over him . That is because they say : There is no blame on us in the matter of the illiterate . And they fabricate a lie against Allah and they know it themselves ( as well ) .
Yes , he who fulfils his promise and adopts God - fearingness ( will indeed face no accountability ) ; so Allah surely loves the pious .
Certainly those who sell the promise of Allah and their own oaths for a small price , it is they who will not have any share in the Hereafter . And on the Day of Resurrection Allah will neither speak to nor look at them and nor will He purify them , and for them will be painful punishment .
And there is indeed another section of them who , while reciting the Book , twist their tongues so that you may take their inverted expressions as ( part of ) the Book whereas it is not from the Book . And they say : It is ( all ) from Allah , while it is not ( at all ) from Allah . They invent a lie against Allah and they know ( it ) themselves as well .
No human being whom Allah blesses with the Book and Wisdom and Prophethood has the right to say to the people : Be my servants instead of Allahs . ( He would rather say : ) Be the devotees of Allah because you teach the Book and because you study it yourselves as well .
And nor would that Messenger ever command you to take the angels and the Prophets as Lords . Would he command you ( now ) to disbelieve after you have become Muslims ?
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when Allah took a firm covenant from the Prophets : When I give you the Book and Wisdom and then there comes to you the Messenger ( who is exalted in glory above all and ) who shall validate the Books you will have with you , you shall then , most certainly , believe in him and most surely help him . Allah said : Do you affirm , and on this ( condition ) hold fast to My heavy Covenant ? All submitted : We affirm . Allah said : Bear witness then and I am also with you among the witnesses .
( Now admonished all mankind : ) Then he who turns away after this ( affirmation ) , it is they who will be the disobedient .
Do they seek some Din ( Religion ) other than Allahs ? And whoever is in the heavens and the earth has embraced His obedience ( whether ) by choice or by constraint , and to Him shall they all be returned .
Say : We believe in Allah and in that which has been sent down to us and in that which has been revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their descendants and that which has been given to Musa ( Moses ) , Isa ( Jesus ) and all other Messengers by their Lord ( we believe in all ) . We do not make distinction in our faith in anyone of them and to Him we submit ourselves .
And whoever seeks a Din ( Religion ) other than Islam that shall not at all be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter .
How shall Allah guide those who disbelieved after embracing faith while they had borne witness that this Messenger is true , and clear Signs too had come to them ? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
The punishment of such people is that they are continually plagued by the curse of Allah , of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall remain ( imprisoned ) under this curse forever . And neither will this torment be lessened nor shall they be given respite .
Except those who repent and mend ( their ) ways . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Assuredly , the people who disbelieve after accepting belief and then advance in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted at all , and it is they who have lost the right path .
Surely those who disbelieved and died while they were disbelievers , if anyone of them offers an earthful of gold as ransom ( for his salvation ) that shall not at all be accepted from him . It is they for whom there is painful torment . And no helper will be possible for them .
You can never attain to piety unless you spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of that which you like the most ; and Allah surely knows well whatever you give away .
Before the revelation of the Torah , everything edible was lawful for the Children of Israel except those ( things ) which Yaqub ( Jacob ) had declared forbidden for himself . Say : Bring the Torah and read it out if you are truthful .
So , whoever fabricates a lie against Allah even after this , then it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Say : Allah has proclaimed the Truth , so follow the Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , rejecting every evil , devoted himself wholly to Allah . And he was not one of the polytheists .
The first House ever constructed for mankind ( to worship ) is indeed the one in Makka teeming with blessings and ( the centre of ) guidance for the whole world .
There are manifest Signs in it , ( one of which is ) the station of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) . Whoever enters it attains safety and protection ; and the Pilgrimage to this House is prescribed for the people for the sake of Allah whoever may afford its journey ; and whoever denies ( it ) then indeed , Allah is Self - Sufficient , Beyond Need of all the worlds .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you deny the Revelations of Allah ? And Allah is observing your actions .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you hinder him from Allahs path who has embraced faith ? You want to make their path crooked too while you are yourselves a witness ( that it is straight ) . And Allah is not unaware of your doings .
O Believers ! If you obey any section of the People of the Book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have ( embraced ) faith .
And how will you disbelieve ( now ) while you are ( fortunate ) ones to whom the Verses of Allah are recited , and the Messenger of Allah ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is ( himself ) present among you ? And whoever holds fast to ( the Embrace of ) Allah is most surely guided to the straight path .
O Believers ! Fear Allah as it is due to fear Him . And death should approach you only in a state when you are Muslim .
And hold fast to the rope of Allah all of you together and do not generate dissension and factions . But call to mind the blessing of Allah upon you when you were enemies ( one to another ) . Then He created the bond of love among your hearts , and by His blessing you became brothers . And you ( had reached ) the brink of a pit of Fire ( of Hell ) but He rescued you from it . That is how Allah elaborates His Signs to you so that you may take guidance to the right path .
And from amongst you there must be a community comprising the people who would invite mankind towards piety , bid righteousness and forbid evil . And they are the successful people .
And become not like those who split into sects and dissented even after manifest Signs had reached them . And it is they who would suffer grievous torment .
On the Day when many faces will be bright and many others will be dark . The ones with dark faces ( will be asked ) : Did you reject faith after you had believed ? So taste the torment for the disbelief you had been committing .
But those with ( glittering ) white faces will be in Allahs Mercy . Therein will they live forever .
These are the Revelations of Allah which We recite to you with Truth . And Allah intends no injustice to mankind .
And whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . And to Allah will all matters be returned .
You are the best community brought forth for ( the guidance of ) mankind : you command righteousness , forbid evil and believe in Allah . Had the People of the Book also embraced faith that would certainly have been in their favour . There are some among them who believe , while the majority of them are disobedient .
They cannot do you any harm beyond offending ; and if they fight you they will turn their backs upon you ; then they will not be helped ( as well ) .
They are shut in humiliation wherever they may be found , except that they are ( provided with shelter ) under some promise with Allah or some bond with people . And they have earned Allahs wrath , and have been subjected to indigence consequent on their rejection of Allahs Revelations and killing the Prophets unjustly , because they turned into rebels and exceeded all limits ( in rebelliousness and defiance ) .
They are not all alike . Some of the People of the Book are ( also ) firmly committed to the Truth . They recite the Verses of Allah during the hours of night and remain in the state of prostration before their Lord .
They believe in Allah and the Last Day and command righteousness , and forbid evil , and advance fast in righteous works . And it is they who are among the pious .
And whatever pious acts they do will not be disregarded ; and Allah is well aware of those who guard against evil .
Certainly those who have disbelieved , neither their riches nor their children will provide them any protection against ( the torment of ) Allah . And they are the ones who are the inmates of Hell and will live there forever .
( Whatever ) wealth ( these people ) spend in the life of this world is like the frost - laden wind which strikes and destroys the harvest of a people who wrong their own souls . And Allah has not done them any wrong but they themselves manage their own wreck .
O Believers ! Do not confide in those who are not from amongst you . They will never miss ( any ) chance to cause you mischief . They wish you severe torture . As for their malice , that has become evident from their utterances , and ( the hostility ) that they have concealed in their hearts is ( even ) greater . We have made the Signs manifest to you , if you would use your intellect .
Beware ! You are the ones who love them but they do not ( even ) like you although you believe in all the Books . When they meet you , they say : We have accepted faith , but when alone , they bite their fingers in rage against you . Say : Perish in your pent - up rage . Certainly Allah knows well the secrets of hearts .
If something goes in your favour , it grieves them ; but if some pain afflicts you , that pleases them . However , if you keep patience and guard yourselves against evil persistently , their deceitfulness would do you no harm . And Allah indeed has encompassed all that they are doing .
And ( recall the time ) when early morning you left your blessed abode ( on the eve of the battle of Uhud ) and were positioning the Muslims at their posts for the battle . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
When two groups from amongst you ( Banu Salma Khazraj and Banu Haritha Aws ) intended to go coward although Allah was their Ally . And the believers must have trust in Allah alone .
And Allah provided you help in the battle of Badr , whereas you had little resources ( at that time ) . Therefore , fear Allah so that you may become grateful .
When you were saying to the believers : Is it not enough for you that your Lord should reinforce you with three thousand sent - down angels ?
Yes , if you remain steadfast and persist in God - wariness and these ( unbelievers ) suddenly launch the blitz against you with ( full ) force , then your Lord would come to your aid with distinctly marked five thousand angels .
And Allah has made this ( reinforcement ) just a glad tidings for you so that it may content your hearts . And support comes only from Allah Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
( Also ) because ( Allah ) may exterminate a section of the unbelievers or abase them so that they go back defeated .
( O Beloved ! Now ) this matter is not your concern whether Allah enables them to repent or torments them , because they are the transgressors .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Allah alone . He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not live on usury doubled and redoubled and keep fearing Allah so that you may prosper .
And fear that Fire which has been prepared for those who reject faith .
And persist in obedience to Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) so that you may be blessed with Mercy .
And advance fast towards forgiveness from your Lord and Paradise whose vastness encompasses the heavens and the earth ( and ) which has been prepared for the pious .
They are the ones who spend in the cause of Allah whether they are affluent or indigent ( in both the conditions ) , sublimate their anger and tolerate ( the faults of the ) people ; and Allah loves those who are benevolent .
And ( they ) are such people that if they commit some immoral act or wrong themselves , they remember Allah , then seek forgiveness for their sins . And who forgives sins except Allah ? And they do not deliberately persist in the sinful acts which they committed .
It is they whose reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They will reside therein permanently . What an excellent reward there is for those who execute righteous acts !
Before you many codes ( of Divine Law ) have passed ( for the preceding nations ) . So travel in the earth and observe what was the end of those who belied !
This Quran is an exposition for mankind and guidance and counsel for those who fear Allah .
And do not lose heart nor feel grieved ; and it is you who will be victorious , provided you maintain ( perfect ) faith .
If you have received a blow ( now , then remember that ) they too have received a similar blow already . These are the days which We rotate among people . And these ( ups and downs ) occur so that Allah may distinguish the identity of true believers and bestow upon some of you the status of martyr . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
And this is ( also ) with the intention that Allah may bring ( more ) refinement to the believers ( i . e . cleanse and purify them ) and annihilate the disbelievers .
Do you assume that you will enter Paradise ( without any good ) whereas Allah has not yet tested those of you who combat for His cause , nor has He judged the steadfast ?
And you used to long for death ( of a martyr ) before you faced it . So now you have seen it in front of your own eyes .
And Muhammad ( [ too ] Allah bless him and give him peace ) is but only a Messenger ( and not God ) . Many a Messenger has passed away ( from this world ) before him as well ( bearing adversities and turmoils ) . So , if he passes away or is martyred , will you then turn on your heels ( back to your former religion i . e . will you consider his death or martyrdom - God forbid - based on either falsehood of Din [ religion ] of Islam or his untrue Messengership ) ? And whoever turns back on his heels shall not harm Allah the least . And Allah will soon reward those who give thanks ( by remaining steadfast in hardship ) .
And no one can die without Allahs Command . ( His ) term has been fixed in writing . And whoever desires the reward of this world , We give him of that ; and whoever longs for the reward of the Hereafter , We give him of that ; and soon shall We pay reward ( affluently ) to those who pay thanks .
And how many a Prophet has there been who fought in the cause of Allah ! A large number of devotees of Allah ( Awliya ) also joined them . They did not lose heart due to hardships which afflicted them in the way of Allah . They neither showed weakness nor gave in . And Allah loves those who remain steadfast .
And they said nothing except this supplication : O our Lord , forgive our sins and overlook the excesses that we committed in our work , and keep us firm - footed ( on Your path ) and bestow upon us victory over the disbelievers .
So , Allah paid them the reward of this world and also an excellent recompense in the Hereafter . And Allah loves ( those ) righteous people ( who are in love with Him alone ) .
O Believers ! If you obey the disbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels ( to disbelief ) . You will then turn back as losers .
Nay , Allah is your Maula ( Helper and Guardian ) and He is the best of helpers .
Soon shall We plant ( your ) awe into the hearts of disbelievers because they have associated that partner with Allah for which He has not sent down any authority . And Hell is their abode and extremely horrible is ( that ) abode of the wrongdoers .
Surely , Allah fulfilled His promise to you when you were killing them by His command until you showed cowardice and you started disputing about the command ( of the Messenger , [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and later disobeyed ( him ) whereas Allah had brought that victory in your sight which you coveted . Among you were some who desired gains of this world and some others who sought reward in the Hereafter . Then He turned you back from them ( dominated ) so that He tests you . ( Later , however , ) He pardoned you and Allah is Most Gracious to the believers .
When you were running away ( in panic ) and did not look back at anyone and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) was calling you out ( standing ) among the party that were ( steadfast ) in your rear . Then He inflicted upon you sorrows one after the other ( for admonition and training ) so that you might not grieve over what you had lost and the calamity that had befallen you . And Allah is Aware of your works .
Then after grief He sent down on you calm ( and peace for relief ) in the form of a slumber that overtook a party of you , while another party ( comprising hypocrites that ) was worried only about their own souls indulged in false assumptions about Allah which were ( just ) the assumptions of ignorance . They say : Do we too have anything ( i . e . authority ) in this matter ? Say : The whole matter is in the Hand of Allah . They have concealed in their hearts things which they let not be disclosed to you . They say : Had we any say in this matter we would not have been slain here . Say : Had you been ( even ) in your homes , those for whom killing was decreed would have come over to their slaughter places . And that has been ( done ) so that Allah may test what is in your breasts and purge exhaustively the ( apprehensions ) pent up in your hearts . And Allah has thorough knowledge of the secrets of breasts .
Certainly , those of you who fled on that day when the two armies engaged in fierce fighting were only caused by Satan to slip , owing to some act they had perpetrated . Allah pardoned them indeed . He is , of course , Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
O Believers ! Be not like the infidels who say of those of their brothers who go ( somewhere ) on a journey or go to fight ( and die there ) : Had they stayed with us they would neither have died nor been slain , so that Allah may make this ( assumption ) a regret in their hearts . It is Allah Who keeps alive and causes death . And Allah keeps a strict eye on what you do .
And if you get slain in the cause of Allah or die , Allahs Forgiveness and Mercy is far better than that ( wealth ) which you accumulate .
And if you die or be slain , you ( all ) will be brought together before Allah .
( O My Adorable Beloved ! ) What a Mercy of Allah that you are lenient with them ! Had you been stern and hard - hearted , people would have deserted , scattering away from around you . So pardon them , and pray for their forgiveness , and consult them in ( important ) matters . But once you make up your mind , then place your trust in Allah . Surely Allah loves those who trust Him .
If Allah helps you , none can overpower you ; but if He abandons you taking away all support , then who is it that can help you after Him ? And the believers should rely on Allah alone .
It is just not conceivable about any Prophet that he would conceal anything . And whoever hides away ( anothers right ) will have to bring forth on the Day of Resurrection whatever he had held back . Then everyone will be paid in full for his deeds , and they will not be wronged .
How can a person who has subjected himself to the will of Allah be like the one who has earned Allahs wrath ? And Hell is his abode and that is an extremely evil dwelling .
They have varying grades in the sight of Allah and Allah thoroughly observes their acts .
Indeed Allah conferred a great favour on the believers that He raised among them ( the most eminent ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) from among themselves who recites to them His Revelations , purifies them and educates them on the Book and Wisdom though , before that , they were in manifest error .
Is it not that when disaster seized you , while you had inflicted twice as much ( on your enemy ) , you said : Whence has it befallen ? Say : It is from your own selves . Indeed , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And the agony that hurt you on the day when the two armies clashed with each other came about ( only ) by Allahs Command . And ( this happened ) so that Allah establishes the identity of the believers .
And ( He ) also distinguishes the identity of those who are hypocrites . And when it was said to them : Come and fight in the cause of Allah or defend ( against the enemy invasion ) , they said : If we knew that there would be a war ( actually of some kind or had we considered it a war in the cause of Allah ) we would certainly follow you . That day they were closer to an evident disbelief as compared to ( the pretended ) belief . They utter that from their mouths which is not in their hearts . And Allah knows well ( the matters ) which they hide .
( They ) are the ones who said about their brothers while they themselves stayed back ( home ) : Had they accepted our counsel , they would not have been slain . Say : Protect yourselves from death if you are truthful .
And do not ( ever ) think that those who are slain in the way of Allah are dead . They are rather alive in the Presence of their Lord . They are served with sustenance ( comprising bounties of Paradise ) .
They rejoice in these ( blessings of eternal life ) which Allah has conferred on them of His Bounty and also feel pleased ( on finding ) their successors ( on the path of faith and obedience ) , who have not ( yet ) joined them , for they shall also have neither any fear nor any grief .
They are filled with joy owing to the blessing ( of divine disclosures of the nearness ) of Allah and His Bounty ( of pleasures of Union with Him ) and ( also ) because Allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
Those who submitted to the Command of Allah and His Messenger even after sustaining injuries for those of them who possess spiritual excellence and are God - fearing , there is immense reward .
They are the ones whom people said : The adversaries have gathered ( in great number ) against you , so fear them . But this ( information ) further enhanced their faith and they proclaimed : Allah is Sufficient for us and what an excellent Guardian He is !
Then they ( the Muslims ) returned with the bounties and blessings of Allah , untouched by any suffering . They followed the will of Allah , and Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty .
Surely this ( informer ) is Satan alone who threatens ( you ) through his friends . Therefore , do not fear them and fear Me alone if you are the believers .
( O Sympathizer of the whole mankind ! ) Those who hasten in ( reinforcing ) disbelief should not aggrieve you . They cannot do any damage to ( the Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah and Allah intends that there is no share for them in the Hereafter . And for them there is severe torment .
Indeed those who buy disbelief at the cost of belief cannot harm Allah the least , and for them there is grievous torment .
And the disbelievers must never assume that the respite We are providing them is of any good for their souls . We are granting them ( this ) respite for the reason that they may grow further in sins . And ( ultimately ) there is for them a humiliating torment .
And Allah will never leave the Muslims in the status quo you are caught in ( now ) until He distinguishes the impure from the pure . And it is not Allahs Glory that , ( O common people , ) he reveals to you the Unseen . However , Allah chooses from among His Messengers whom He wills ( for the knowledge of the unseen ) . Therefore , put faith in Allah and His Messengers . And if you embrace faith and become God - fearing , there is a tremendous reward for you .
And those who are niggardly in giving away ( from the wealth ) which Allah has bestowed upon them out of His bounty must never consider this miserliness of any benefit for themselves ; it is rather injurious to them . Soon on the Day of Resurrection this wealth , which they are niggardly about , will be put around ( their necks ) like a neck - fetter . To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . He will remain the Owner of the universe after your death in the same way as He owns it today ) . And Allah is Well Aware of all your deeds .
Allah has , surely , heard the remarks of those who say : Allah is indigent and we are rich . We shall keep a written record of all that they say and their unjust killing of Messengers ( as well ) . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) We shall say : ( Now you ) taste the incinerating torment .
This is the recompense of your deeds that your hands have forwarded ahead and Allah , indeed , does not do injustice to servants .
The people ( Jews ) who say ( as a justification ) : Allah sent to us the Command not to put faith in any Messenger unless he brings us an offering ( to prove his Messengership ) whom fire will ( break out to ) devour . Say ( to them ) : Certainly many Messengers with evident Signs preceded me and also ( came ) with the Sign which you speak of . Then ( despite that ) why did you martyr them if you are ( so ) truthful ?
If , even then , they belie you , ( My Beloved , do not be aggrieved ) . So many Messengers were belied before you who brought clear Signs ( miracles ) , Scriptures and the Enlightening Book .
Every soul is going to taste death . And your full recompense shall be paid back only on the Day of Resurrection . So , whoever will be saved from Hell and admitted to Paradise will be truly successful . And the worldly life is nothing but illusory wealth .
( O Believers ! ) You shall most certainly be tested in your possessions and your selves . And of course you shall have also to hear many torturing ( taunts ) from those who were given the Book before you and who are polytheists . But if you remain patient and stick to self - protection , that is one of the works demanding high resolve .
And when Allah took a firm promise from those who were given the Book : You shall communicate it clearly and plainly to the people and shall not hide ( whatever is described in it ) , they cast this promise behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . This is an extremely evil transaction on their part .
Never regard those ( as the emancipated ones ) who rejoice over their crooked works and want to be praised for the deeds that they have never done . ( Proclaimed for emphasis : ) never think that they are delivered from punishment ; and for them is an awful torment .
The Sovereignty of all the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone and Allah has Perfect Control over everything . ( So focus your attention on and trust in Him alone . )
Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day there are Signs ( of Allahs Absolute Authority ) for those who possess constructive wisdom .
These are the people who , remembering Allah , remain standing ( as the epitome of submissiveness ) , sitting ( as reverence incarnate ) and ( also keep ) changing sides ( in discomfort of love ) and meditate on ( manifest lustre of His Eminence and Beauty at work in ) the creation of the heavens and the earth . ( Then acquainted with the pleasure of His gnosis , they call out spontaneously : ) O our Lord , You have not created ( all ) this without any rationale and strategy . You are impeccably Pure ( of all shortcomings and obligations ) . So protect us from the torment of Hell .
O our Lord ! Indeed whomever You admit to Hell , You have surely humiliated him and the wrongdoers do not have any supporters .
O our Lord ! ( We were oblivious of You , ) then we heard a Caller , calling towards faith : ( O people , ) believe in your Lord . So we embraced faith . O our Lord , now forgive our sins and erase our blunders ( from the record of our works ) and make us die in the company of the pious .
O our Lord ! Grant us all that You have promised us through Your Messengers and do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection . Surely , You do not go against Your promise .
Then their Lord accorded approval to their supplication ( and said : ) Certainly I do not waste wages of any labourer whether man or woman ; you all are from one another . So those who have emigrated ( for the cause of Allah ) and have been driven out of their dwellings ( for Him alone ) and have been offended in My way , and fought for My sake and were slain , I shall verily erase their sins from their record of works and admit them to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . This is the reward from Allah and ( even ) better reward ( than this ) lies with Allah alone .
( O servant of Allah ! ) The roaming about of the disbelievers in the cities ( with luxurious riches ) should not cause you any illusion .
This is an insignificant possession ( for a brief period ) . Then their abode will be Hell and that is a very evil abode .
But those who persist in fearing their Lord , for them there are Gardens beneath which rivers flow . There will they reside forever . This is hospitaility ( for them ) from Allah . And ( His chamber of Proximity , lustre of His Beauty and the Blessing of Union with Him , in sum , ) whatever there is with Allah is excellent for the pious .
And indeed some People of the Book are such that they believe in Allah and also ( have faith in ) the Book that has been revealed to you and the one which was sent down to them . Their hearts remain subdued before Allah . And they do not receive paltry price for the Revelations of Allah . They are the ones whose reward lies with their Lord . Indeed Allah is Swift at reckoning .
O Believers ! Be steadfast and in perseverance ( and tenacity ) toil ( even harder than the enemy ) and be alert and vigilant ( for struggle against violation of peace and human rights ) , and ( always ) persist in fearing Allah so that you may achieve success .
O Mankind ! Fear your Lord Who ( initiated ) your creation from a single soul , then from it created its mate , and from these two spread ( the creation of ) countless men and women . So , fear Allah for Whose sake you solicit needs from one another . And ( become God - fearing ) towards your own kith and kin ( as well ) . Allah is indeed Ever - Watchful over you .
And deliver to the orphans their belongings ; and do not exchange the bad for the good ; nor consume their wealth by mixing it with your own . Indeed this is a great sin .
And if you have the apprehension that you will not be able to treat the orphan girls justly then marry the women you like and who are lawful for you , two or three or four ( but this sanction is conditional on justice ) . Then if you fear that you will not be able to treat ( more than one wife ) justly then ( marry ) only one woman or the maids who have come under your possession ( in accordance with the Islamic law ) . This makes it more likely that you restrain you from committing injustice .
And pay the women their dower with a pleased heart . Then if they forgo for you some ( of the dower ) out of their own pleasure , you may consume it as pleasant and favourable ( for you ) .
And do not entrust to the mentally deficient your ( or their ) assets which Allah has made a means of stability for your economy . However , feed them out of it and clothe them , and say to them good and nice words .
And evaluate and test the orphans ( for the sake of their training ) till they attain to ( the age of ) marriage . Then if you discern in them ingenuity ( and the knack of planning ) , hand over their assets to them . And devour not their wealth spending it wastefully and in haste ( fearing that after ) they grow mature ( they will take it back ) . The one who is affluent must absolutely abstain ( from the orphans property ) but he who is indigent ( himself ) should consume but a fair portion of it ( only ) . And when you return to them their assets , take witnesses over them . And Sufficient is Allah at reckoning .
Men have a share in ( the assets ) that their parents and nearest kin leave behind and women ( also ) have a share in the inheritance of their parents and the nearest kin . Be it small or large , the share has been fixed ( by Allah ) .
If the relatives ( other than heirs ) and the orphans and the indigent are present on the occasion of division ( of inheritance ) , give them also something out of it and say to them good and nice words .
And the people ( who execute matters of orphans ) should fear that ( while dying ) if they were to leave tender offspring behind , ( how ) frightened ( and worried ) would they be over the plight of their children ! They should , therefore , keep fearing Allah ( in the matter of orphans ) and should say the things straight .
Indeed those who eat up the property of orphans unjustly fill their bellies but with fire , and soon will they fall into a Blazing Fire .
Allah commands you concerning ( inheritance of ) your children : The share of a son is equal to that of two daughters ; then if there are only daughters ( two or ) more , they are entitled to two - thirds of the inheritance ; if there is only one daughter , her share will be one half ; the mother and the father of the deceased will get one - sixth of the inheritance each , if the deceased leaves children behind ; but in case the deceased has no children and the heirs are only his mother and his father , the mothers share is one - third ( and the rest is the fathers ) ; then , if he has brothers and sisters , the mother will have a sixth portion . This distribution will be ( executed ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will he may have made or after ( the payment of ) the debt . You know not which of them , whether your parents or your sons , are closer to you in bringing you benefit . This ( distribution ) is a duty assigned ( i . e . fixed ) by Allah . Surely , Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And for you , the share in the property your wives leave is one half , provided they have no children . In case they have offspring then for you there is one - fourth of inheritance , ( that too ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will that may have been made or after ( the payment of ) debt . And the share of your wives in the assets you leave is one - forth , provided you have no children . But if you have children then their share in your inheritance is one - eighth , after ( the fulfilment of ) the will made pertaining to ( the inheritance ) or the payment of ( your ) debt . In the case of a man or a woman who leaves neither parents nor children , but who has a brother or a sister ( on the mothers side i . e . a uterine brother or a sister ) , there is a one - sixth share for each of the two . But if they are more than that , they all will be sharers in one - third . ( This division shall also be accomplished ) after the will which is made without any prejudice towards the heirs or after the ( payment ) of debt . This is a Command from Allah and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Forbearing .
These are the limits set by Allah . And the one who obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) , He ( Allah ) will admit him to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They shall reside therein forever , and this is a great achievement .
But whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and exceeds His limits , He will admit him to Hell wherein shall he live forever ; and there is a humiliating torment for him .
And those of your women who commit adultery , call in from your men four witnesses against them . Then if they produce evidence , confine those women to their houses till death completes their term of life or Allah ordains a way ( i . e . a new injunction ) for them .
And the two persons from among you who commit adultery , afflict them both . Then , if they repent and mend ( their ) ways , refrain from punishing them . Indeed Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah has promised to accept the repentance of only those who commit evil deeds due to ignorance , then repent soon after . So Allah will return to such people with His Mercy and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But repentance is not ( accepted ) of the people who persist in sinful acts until death overtakes one of them , ( then ) he says : Now I repent . Nor is repentance ( of any avail ) for those who die as disbelievers . We have prepared grievous torment for them .
O Believers ! It is not lawful for you to become heirs to women by force . And do not hold them back in order to take ( back ) from them a portion of that which you gave them , unless they commit open indecency . And treat them honourably . Then if you dislike them , it may be that you dislike a thing and Allah places in it abundant good .
And if you seek to take a wife in place of another and you have ( by now ) given to her heaps of wealth , yet do not take back any part of it . Do you want to take that wealth ( back ) by means of unjust accusation and manifest sin ?
And how can you take it back while you have had marital relations with each other and they have ( also ) taken a firm promise from you ?
And do not marry women whom your fathers and forefathers married . But that which has passed ( before this command is forgiven ) . It is indeed highly indecent , infuriating and an evil custom .
Forbidden to you are your mothers , your daughters , your sisters , your fathers sisters and your mothers sisters and your brothers daughters and sisters daughters and your mothers ( who ) have suckled you , your foster sisters and mothers of your wives . And ( similarly ) your stepdaughters brought up under your parentage born of your women with whom you have had marital relations ( are also forbidden to you . ) If you have not had martial relations , then there is no harm ( in marrying their daughters ) . Forbidden are also wives of your real sons who are of your loins and having ( in marriage ) two sisters together , except that which has passed in the days of ignorance . Allah indeed is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( forbidden to you are also ) women having husbands except those ( prisoners of war ) who come into your legal possession . Allah has prescribed for you ( these Commands of forbiddance ) . And ( all women ) other than these are made lawful for you , so that you may wish them for marriage by means of your money ( dower ) , maintaining chastity and not in pursuit of satisfying lust . Then those of them from whom you have received benefit in exchange for that ( money ) , pay them their fixed dowers . And there is no sin on you pertaining to the money on which you mutually agree after fixing the dower . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever of you cannot afford to marry free believing women may marry those believing slave girls who are in your possession ( under Islamic Law ) . And Allah knows best ( the state of ) your belief . You ( all ) are one from another . So , marry these ( slave girls ) with the permission of their masters , and pay them their dowers according to custom , provided they are wedlocked ( being chaste ) , neither committing illegal sex nor taking secret lovers . If they commit fornication after they have entered into wedlock , their punishment will be the half of that ( appointed ) for free ( unmarried ) women . This permission is for him among you who fears ( indulging in ) sin and if you practise self - restraint that is better for you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah intends to explain to you ( His Commands ) and guide you to the ways of those ( pious ) people who have passed before you and return to you in Mercy . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And Allah intends to bestow upon you His Favour , but those who pursue the lusts ( of the ill - commanding selves ) wish you to turn far away from the right path .
Allah intends to lighten your burden . And man has been created weak ( and infirm ) .
O Believers ! Do not devour one anothers wealth unlawfully among yourselves unless it is a trade by your mutual agreement and do not kill yourselves . Surely , Allah is Kind to you .
But whoever will do that through transgression and injustice , We shall soon throw him into the Fire ( of Hell ) and that is very easy for Allah .
If you keep abstaining from major sins that you are forbidden to do We shall remove from you your minor sins and shall admit you to a place of honour .
And do not long for the thing in which Allah has made some of you superior to others . Men will have a share of what they earn , and women will have a share of what they earn , and keep begging Allah for His Bounty . Surely Allah knows best everything .
And We have appointed to everyone legatees ( heirs ) of the property left by parents and near relations . And to those with whom you have made an agreement , give them their share . Assuredly , Allah observes everything .
Men are guardians and managers over women , because Allah has made one superior to the other and ( also ) because men spend their wealth ( on them ) . So the pious wives are obedient . They guard ( their chastity ) in the absence of their husbands with the protection of Allah . But those women whom you fear would disobey and defy , admonish them ; and ( if they do not amend , ) separate them ( from yourselves ) in beds ; and ( if they still do not improve , ) beat them ( softly to bring reform ) . Then if they become obedient to you , do not seek any way ( to oppress ) them . Surely , Allah is Most High , Most Great .
And if you fear a breach between the two then appoint one arbitrator from the husbands family and the other from the wifes family . If both ( the arbitrators ) resolve to bring about settlement , Allah will create harmony between them . Indeed , Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware .
And worship Allah and do not set up any partners with Him . And treat the parents with moral excellence and ( do good to ) relatives , orphans , the needy , close as well as unacquainted neighbours , and your fellows and the wayfarers and those whom you possess . Surely Allah does not like the one who is arrogant ( self - conceited ) and boastful ( egoist ) .
Those who are miserly and bid others ( also ) to be miserly , and hide that ( blessing ) which Allah has granted them of His Bounty . And We have prepared a disgraceful torment for the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to show off to people , and believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day . And whoever Satan sides with as a companion , so he is an evil companion !
And what loss would they have suffered if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day , and spent ( in His way ) of what Allah had given them ? And Allah is Well Aware of them ( their state of affairs ) .
Surely , Allah does not do ( even ) an iota of injustice and if there be a good work , He doubles it and grants from His Presence an immense reward .
Then how it will be on the Day when We shall bring one witness from each Umma ( Community ) , and , ( O Beloved , ) We shall bring you as a witness against them all !
On that Day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) would wish that ( after burying them ) the earth over them were levelled . And they will not be able to hide anything from Allah .
O Believers ! Do not go near Prayer in a drunken state until you are able to understand what you say . Nor ( should you approach Prayer ) until you bathe after total ablution becomes obligatory unless you are travelling . And if you are sick or on a journey or return from a call of nature or make sexual contact with ( your ) women and then fail to find water , clean yourselves by using pure soil . So wipe your faces and hands . Surely , Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the ( revealed ) Book ? They buy misguidance and want you ( also ) to turn away from the straight path .
And Allah knows best your enemies and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Protector and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Helper .
And some among the Jews pervert the words ( of the Torah ) from their ( root ) places and say : We have heard but we disobey , and ( also say ) : Listen ! ( God forbid ! ) May you not be listened to , and twisting their tongues , scoffing at Din ( Religion ) they say : Raina . And , ( instead , ) if they had said : We have heard and obeyed , and ( Your Eminence ! Please ) give audience ( to our request ) and bless us with a ( benevolent and kind ) look , that would have been better for them and ( this utterance ) would have been right and appropriate ( too ) but Allah has cursed them owing to their disbelief . So they do not believe except a few .
O People of the Book ! Believe in ( that Book ) which We have revealed ( now to Our Beloved Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) which ( originally ) confirms the Book that is with you , before We disfigure ( features of some ) faces and turn them on to their rear , or cast on them a curse like the one that We cast on those ( who disobeyed ) in the case of Sabbath . And the Commandment of Allah is bound to be executed .
Surely , Allah does not forgive setting up of partners with Him , and He forgives ( any other sin ) lesser in degree whom He wills . And whoever sets up partners with Allah certainly fabricates a horrible sin .
Have you not seen the people who show themselves off as pure ? Nay , Allah is the One Who purifies whom He pleases and they will not be wronged even equal to a thread .
Look ! How they invent a lie against Allah , and this manifest sin is simply sufficient ( for afflicting them with torment ) !
Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of ( the revealed ) Book ? ( In spite of that ) they believe in idols and Satan . And about the disbelievers they say : These ( disbelievers ) are better guided than the believers .
These are the people Allah has cursed , and you will not find at all any helper for the one whom Allah curses .
Have they any share in the Kingdom ? If so , they would not give ( anything ) to the people worth even a speck ( because of their niggardliness ) .
Do they ( Jews ) feel jealous of the people because of ( the blessings ) which Allah has conferred upon them of His Bounty ? So , surely We have given the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) the Book and wisdom , and We also granted them a great kingdom .
So , some of them believed in it and some turned away from it , and ( for those who turn away ) enough is the blazing Fire of Hell .
Surely those who disbelieved in Our Revelations , We shall soon hurl them into the Fire ( of Hell ) . When their skins are burnt off , We shall replace them with other skins so that they may taste the torment ( ceaselessly ) . Surely , Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Those who believe and stick to doing pious acts , We shall admit them to Gardens beneath which streams flow . They shall live there forever . Therein shall be pure spouses for them . And We shall admit them into plenteous deep shades .
Surely , Allah commands you to entrust the belongings to those who are worthy of them ; and when you judge matters among people , give judgment with justice . What an excellent advice Allah gives you ! Surely , Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those ( men of Truth ) who hold command among you . Then if you disagree among yourselves over any issue , refer it to Allah and the Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] for final judgment ) if you believe in Allah and the Last Day . That is best ( for you ) and best for the end result .
Have you not seen these ( hypocrites ) who claim ( verbally ) that they believe in this ( Book i . e . the Quran , ) which has been revealed to you and also in those ( revealed Books ) which were sent down before you ? ( But ) they desire to take their disputes ( for settlement ) to Satan ( i . e . the law based on defiance against Allahs Commandments ) although they have been ordained to reject it ( openly ) . And Satan only desires to lead them far astray .
And when they are asked to come to what Allah has revealed ( the Quran ) and to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you will see that the hypocrites turn away from ( coming towards ) you .
Then what will be their plight ( at that time ) when some disaster befalls them on account of their own crooked works , and they will appear before you swearing by Allah , ( saying ) : We intended nothing but piety and mutual harmony ?
These are the ( hypocrite and vicious ) people that Allah knows best every secret of their hearts . So , avoid them and admonish them persistently and establish effective communication with them about themselves .
And We have not sent any Messenger but that he must be obeyed by the Command of Allah . And , ( O Beloved , ) if they , having wronged their souls , had come to you imploring the forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) had also asked forgiveness for them , then ( owing to this mediation and intercession ) they would certainly have found Allah Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
So , ( O Beloved , ) by your Lord they cannot become true believers until they make you a judge in every dispute that arises among them , and thereafter they do not feel any resentment in their hearts against the judgment that you make , and submit ( to your decision ) gladly , with total submission .
If We had prescribed for them : Kill yourselves or leave your homes and go away , only a few of them would have acted upon it . If they had abided by what they were advised to do , that would have been in their favour , enabling them to hold fast tenaciously ( to the Faith ) .
And then We too would have bestowed upon them a great reward from Our Presence .
And We would have surely guided them to the straight path .
And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they are the people who shall be in the company of those ( spiritual dignitaries on the Last Day ) whom Allah has blessed with His ( special ) favour : the Prophets , the Truthful , the Martyrs and the Most Pious . And how excellent these companions are !
This ( exceptional ) Bounty is from Allah and Allah suffices as a Knower .
O Believers ! Fit out for your safeguard , then set out as separate units or march off all together ( to stirve hard and eliminate militancy and terrorism ) .
And certainly there are some among you who delay ( slackening intentionally ) . Then if ( during war ) some adversity befalls you , he ( who tarries behind ) says : Indeed Allah has favoured me that I was not present with them ( in the battlefield ) .
But if some favour comes to you from Allah , ( then ) the same ( hypocrite ) shall ( regretfully ) say ( in the manner ) as if there was no friendship between you and him : Would that I had been with them , then I would also have achieved massive triumph .
So they ( the believers ) should fight in the cause of Allah ( for the promotion of good and human dignity ) who sell the life of this world for the Hereafter . And whoso fights in the way of Allah , whether he ( himself ) gets slain or wins victory , ( in both cases ) We shall soon bless him with great reward .
What has happened to you ( Muslims , ) that you do not fight in the cause of Allah ( for the freedom of the oppressed ) whereas those helpless ( oppressed and tyrannized ) men , women and children who , ( depressed by the oppression and tyranny , ) call out ( for their freedom ) : O our Lord ! Rescue us from this town whose ( affluent and influential ) people are oppressors and appoint for us some guardian from Your Presence and make someone our helper from Your Presence .
Those who believe fight in the way of Allah ( for the cause of peace and libration of the oppressed ) , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of Satan ( for evil and mischievous objectives ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fight against Satans allies ( the supporters of Satans mission ) . Surely Satans maneuvering is ineffective .
Have you not observed the state of those who were instructed ( in the beginning for a short period ) : Restrain your hands ( from fighting ) and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly ? ( So they were happy with it . ) But when the armed struggle ( against evil , tyranny and oppression ) was prescribed for them , a section of them started fearing ( hostile ) people the way one fears Allah or even more . And they said : O our Lord ! Why have You enjoined fighting upon us ( so soon ) ? Why have You not given us respite for another short period ? Say ( to them ) : Worldly interest is minor ( immaterial ) while the Hereafter is an extremely valuable ( blessing ) for the one who becomes God - wary and pious . There , you shall not be treated unjustly even equal to a thread .
( O you who abstain from the armed struggle due to fear of death ! ) Death will overtake you wherever you may be , ( even ) if you are in unconquerable fortresses . And ( this is their mentality that ) if some good fortune ( benefit ) comes to them , they say : It is from Allah ( i . e . intermediation and benevolence of the Messenger has no role in it ) , and if some adversity befalls them , they say : ( O Messenger ! ) It is from you ( i . e . because of you ) . Say : ( In fact , ) all comes from Allah . So , what has gone wrong with these people that they do not feel inclined to understand anything ?
( O man ! Train your self this way that ) if some good fortune comes to you ( consider that ) it is from Allah ( do not attribute it to the excellence of your strategy ) . And when some misfortune befalls you ( believe that ) it is from yourself ( attribute it to the evil in your own self ) . And , ( O Beloved , ) We have sent you as a Messenger to the whole mankind and Allah is Sufficient as a witness ( to your Messengership ) .
Whoever obeys the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) obeys ( but ) Allah indeed , but he who turns away , then We have not sent you to watch over them .
And ( the state of these hypocrites is such that in your presence ) they say : ( We ) have obeyed ( your order ) . But when they depart from your Presence , a section of them opine at night contrary to what you have said ( and indulge in intriguing consultations ) . And Allah is recording ( all that ) which they plot all night . So , ( O Beloved , ) turn away your illumined face from them and trust Allah , and Sufficient is Allah as a Guardian .
Do they not ponder over the Quran ? Had this ( Quran come ) from anyone other than Allah , these people would have found in it many contradictions .
When there comes to them any news of peace or fear , they spread it around . Had they referred it to the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) or those of them who are in command ( instead of making it public ) , then those among them who can draw conclusion from some matter would have found it ( i . e . the truth of the news ) . Had there not been Allahs Favour to you and His Mercy , certainly you would ( all ) have followed Satan except only a few .
So , ( O Beloved , ) fight in the cause of Allah . You will not be held responsible ( for anyone else ) but your own soul . And motivate the believers ( for fighting ) . It will be no wonder if Allah smashes the attacking power of the disbelievers . And Allah is Strongest in hold as well as Hardest in punishment .
Whoever makes a righteous intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its reward ) , and he who makes an evil intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its sin ) , and Allah has Full Control over everything .
And when you are honoured with ( a word of ) greeting , then ( in reply ) greet with a better ( salutation ) or ( at least ) reciprocate ( in the same words ) . Surely Allah takes an account of everything .
Allah is He apart from Whom there is none worthy of worship . He shall certainly gather you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . And who is more truthful in word than Allah ?
So what has happened to you that you are split into two groups with regard to the hypocrites , while Allah has overturned them ( i . e . their reason and contemplation ) owing to their misdeeds ? Do you seek to guide him to the straight road whom Allah has held strayed ( because of their own misdeeds ) ? And , ( O listener , ) you cannot at all find a way ( of guidance ) for him whom Allah holds misguided .
These ( the hypocrites ) wish that you should also disbelieve as they have disbelieved so that you all might become alike . So do not make friends with ( any of ) them until they emigrate in the Way of Allah ( in order to prove their faith and truthfulness ) . Then , if they turn away , seize them and kill them wherever you find them , and take not ( any of ) them either for a friend or for a helper .
But ( do not kill ) those who have allied with a people between you and whom there is a ( peace ) treaty , or who ( losing heart ) come to you in such a state that their breasts are afflicted ( with this obsession ) whether they should fight you or their own people . If Allah had so willed , He ( strengthening their hearts ) would have given them supremacy over you . Then they would certainly have fought you . So if they keep away from you and do not fight you and send you ( a message ) for peace , then ( in the interest of peace ) Allah has left no way open for you ( to launch any aggression ) against them .
Now you will find another category of people who desire to remain free of any threat from you ( by hypocritically pretending to believe ) , and ( also ) live in peace from their own community ( by siding with disbelievers secretly . But their true state is this that ) whenever they are turned to mischief ( and wickedness against Muslims ) they plunge ( headlong ) into it . So if they do not give up ( fighting against you , nor ) send you any ( message for ) peace , ( nor ) hold their hands off ( their disruptive activities ) , then seize ( and capture ) them and kill them wherever you find them . And it is they against whom We have granted you unrestricted authority .
And it is not ( lawful ) for a Muslim to kill a Muslim but by mistake ( i . e . unintentionally ) . And anyone who kills a Muslim unintentionally shall ( be liable to ) free a Muslim slave / slave girl and ( pay ) blood money , to be ( necessarily ) handed over to the heirs of the person slain , unless they remit it . In case , he ( the slain ) comes from the people who are your enemies and is a believer ( as well ) , then ( only ) freeing a slave / slave girl is prescribed . But if he ( the slain ) belongs to a people between you and whom is a ( peace ) treaty , then blood compensation must be delivered to his family , and freeing a Muslim slave / slave girl is also mandatory . Then he who does not find ( a slave or slave girl ) is ( bound ) to fast for two consecutive months . ( This is his ) repentance ( prescribed ) by Allah . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But he who kills a Muslim deliberately , his sentence will be Hell wherein will he abide for ages . Allah will afflict him with His wrath and will cast His curse on him . And He has prepared for him a dreadful torment .
O Believers ! When you set out ( to fight ) in the way of Allah , carry out a careful probe and do not say to him who greets you ( as a Muslim ) : You are not a believer . You seek goods of worldly life ( in the shape of spoils of war , after killing a Muslim declaring him a disbeliever ) . So , ( rest assured that ) Allah has gains and booties in plenty . Before this you ( too ) were the same . Then Allah conferred on you His Favour ( and you became Muslims ) . So investigate and confirm the truth ( about others as well ) . Surely , Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
Those of the Muslims who ( shirking fight ) stay back ( home ) without any stressful condition ( excuse ) , and those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources cannot be equal ( in their reward and grading ) . Allah has exalted in rank those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources above those who stay back withdrawn . Allah has ( surely ) promised good to all ( the believers , yet ) He has bestowed the merit of excellence with a mighty reward ( and bounty ) to those who strive hard over those who stay behind .
There are ( for them multiple ) degrees of higher grades from Him and Forgiveness and Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those whose lives angels take in such a state that ( due to living in an environment of injustice , oppression and extremism ) they have ruined their souls , the angels ask them : What condition were you in ? ( You neither struggled to promote justice , tolerance and peace nor left for the land of equity and peace . ) They ( regretfully ) reply : We were powerless and helpless in the land . The angels will say : Was not Allahs earth vast enough for you to emigrate in it ( somewhere ) ? So it is they whose abode is Hell , and what an evil abode that is !
Except for those really helpless men , women and children who neither are capable to make any plan nor do they know any way ( to escape from there ) .
They are those whom Allah shall certainly spare , and Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
And he who emigrates leaving his home in the way of Allah will find ( for Hijra - emigration ) many places in the earth and plentiful provision ( for sustenance ) , and he who leaves his home , emigrating towards Allah and His Messenger and then death overtakes him ( on the way ) , his reward with Allah is ensured and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And when you travel in the land , there will be no sin on you if you shorten the Prayer ( i . e . offer two instead of four mandatory cycles ) , if you fear that the disbelievers are likely to afflict you with distress . Assuredly , the disbelievers are your open enemies .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when you are ( present ) among these ( soldiers ) , form up for them ( congregational ) Prayer . A squad of them , retaining their arms , should ( first ) stand by you ( to follow you in Prayer ) ; having performed their prostrations , they should , ( getting aside , ) take position in your rear . And ( now ) another squad who has not ( yet ) prayed should come up and pray with you ( under your leadership ) ; they should ( also ) hold on to their security measures and retain their weapons ( persistently ) . The infidels want you to become neglectful of your weapons and other means of defence that they may launch a sudden attack against you . If you face a problem due to rain or disease , there is no harm if you ( remove and ) set your weapons aside , and hold fast to your means of security . Verily , Allah has prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
So , ( O Muslims , ) when you have finished your Prayers , remember Allah ( in all postures : ) standing , sitting and ( lying down ) on your sides . And when ( free of fear ) you feel secure , establish Prayers ( as prescribed ) . Verily , Prayer is obligatory for Muslims in accordance with the fixed timings .
And do not slacken in pursuing the foes . If you are afflicted with pain ( in this pursuit ) then they also face but ( similar ) suffering as you are exposed to . But you have hope ( of reward and bounty ) from Allah which they do not . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Surely We have revealed to you the Book based on Truth so that you may judge between the people in accordance with ( the Truth ) which Allah has shown to you . And ( never ) become a contender on behalf of the treacherous ones .
And implore Allahs forgiveness . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And do not plead ( in defence of ) those who are deceiving their own souls . Surely , Allah does not like anyone who is a committed betrayer and sinner .
They hide ( their deceitfulness ) from people ( feeling ashamed ) , but feel no shame before Allah while He is with them when they hold consultations ( secretly ) at night about that matter which Allah disapproves . And Allah has encompassed whatever they do .
Beware ! You are those who pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will contend with Allah on their behalf ( even ) on the Day of Resurrection , or who will be their advocate ( on that Day too ) ?
And he who commits evil or wrongs his own soul and then seeks Allahs forgiveness will find Allah Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And whoever commits sin is only bringing ( its consequent misery ) to his own soul and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever commits some error or sin and then casts its blame on some innocent person has certainly taken ( the burden of ) a calumny and an open sin .
And , ( O Beloved , ) had not Allahs Bounty and Mercy been upon you , a party of these ( treacherous ) people had resolved to lead you astray whereas they are only leading themselves astray and can no way do any harm to you . And Allah has revealed to you the Book and Wisdom and has bestowed upon you all that knowledge which you did not possess . Mighty indeed is Allahs Bounty on you .
There is no good in most of their secret consultations except only ( the counsel ) of the person who enjoins charity or piety or peace - making among people . And whoever does this seeking Allahs pleasure , We shall soon bless him with a mighty reward .
But whoever opposes the Messenger ( Allah bless him and give him peace ) after the path of guidance has become clear to him , and follows the path other than that of the believers , We shall keep him in the same ( state of disorientation ) he has ( himself ) turned to , and shall ( eventually ) cast him into Hell and that is an evil dwelling .
Assuredly , Allah does not forgive ( the sin of ) setting up any partner with Him , but He forgives any ( sin ) lesser than that whom He wills . And the one who associates anything with Allah as His partner has surely strayed far off .
These ( polytheists ) worship merely the feminine objects apart from Allah , and they worship only Satan , the rebel .
( Satan ) on whom Allah has laid His curse and who said : I will certainly pull off ( for myself ) an appointed portion of Your servants .
I will , for sure , lead them estray , arouse in them foul aspirations and keep directing them . So they will definitely incise the ears of cattle . And indeed I shall command them persistently . So they will surely alter what Allah has created . And whoever forsakes Allah and takes Satan for a friend suffers most certainly a perceptible loss .
Satan makes to them ( false ) promises and stirs up in them ( deceitful ) hopes , and Satan makes not any promise to them except deception .
They are the people whose abode is Hell and they shall not find any way to escape from it .
But those who have believed and kept doing pious acts , We shall soon admit them to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath . They shall reside in them for ever . This is Allahs true promise , and who can be more truthful in Word than Allah ?
( Allahs promise of salvation ) does not accord with what you desire , nor with what the People of the Book aspire to . Whoever does an evil deed will be punished for it , and he will not find for himself any supporter or helper apart from Allah .
But anyone , whether man or woman , who does pious acts and is a believer , they are the ones who shall enter Paradise and shall not be wronged a speck .
And with regard to Din ( Religion ) , who can be better than whoever submits his whole being entirely to Allah while he also holds spiritual excellence , and persistently follows Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) a devotee ( to Allah and ) upright ? And Allah had taken Ibrahim ( Abraham ) for a sincere and intimate friend . ( So , he also becomes Allahs friend by virtue of his spiritual affiliation to Ibrahim [ Abraham ] . )
And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth and Allah has encompassed everything .
And , ( O Prophet , ) people ask about your edict on matters concerning ( orphan ) women . Say : Allah ordains you in their case and the commandment ( already ) being communicated to you in the holy Book ( also ) pertains to those orphan women whom you deny ( the rights ) which have been prescribed for them . And ( in order to take their assets into possession ) you want to marry them . In addition to that , there is ( also a decree ) on affairs concerning helpless minor children , that stick to justice in matters of orphans . And whatever good you do , Allah is indeed Well Aware of that .
If a woman fears maltreatment or indifference on the part of her husband , there is no harm if both ( husband and wife ) reconcile on some appropriate accord , and reconciliation ( in truth ) is best . The human nature has ( no doubt ) been made ( more or less ) self - seeking , but if you practise benevolence and guard yourselves against evil , Allah is indeed Well Aware of the works that you do .
And you simply do not have the ability to do ( ideal ) justice amongst your ( more than one ) wives , however ardently you may desire to do it . Do not , therefore , incline with absolute fondness ( towards one , thus ) leaving the other like something suspended ( in the midst ) . But if you mend your ways and refrain ( from injustice and maltreatment ) , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And if both ( husband and wife ) end up in separation , Allah will make each of them independent ( of the other ) out of His Own Abundance and Allah is All - Embracing , Most Wise .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And no doubt We enjoined those ( too ) who were given the Book before you and ( have ordained ) you ( as well ) to keep fearing Allah . But if you disobey , then assuredly whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah , and Allah is Beyond All Needs , Ever - Praiseworthy .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and enough is Allah to be the Guardian .
O People ! If He wills , He may eliminate you and bring others ( in your place ) and Allah is All - Powerful to do this .
Whoever desires the reward of the world , then with Allah is the reward of ( both ) the world and the Hereafter and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Become tenaciously firm on justice , bearing witness ( merely ) for the sake of Allah even if ( the witness ) is against your own selves or ( your ) parents or ( your ) relatives . Whether the person ( against whom is the evidence ) is rich or poor , Allah is a greater Well - Wisher of them both ( than you are ) . So do not follow the desires of your ( ill - commanding ) selves lest you swerve from justice . But if ( while giving evidence ) you engineer your statement or evade ( the truth ) , then Allah is indeed Well Aware of ( all the works ) that you are doing .
O Believers ! Put faith in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and in the Book which He has revealed to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the Book that He revealed before ( it ) . And he who denies Allah , His angels , His Books , His Messengers and the Last Day has surely strayed far away .
Indeed those who believe , then disbelieve and then believe again and reject faith once more and then advance further in denying faith , Allah will never ( incline to ) forgive them , nor guide them to the straight road .
( O Prophet ! ) Convey to the hypocrites the news that a grievous torment awaits them .
( They are ) those who make friends with disbelievers instead of the believers . Do they seek honour in their company ? So , all veneration ( and glory ) belongs only to Almighty Allah .
And indeed Allah has revealed to you this ( Command ) in the Book that when you hear Allahs Revelations being denied and ridiculed , do not sit in their company until they engage in some other discourse ( renouncing the denial and ridicule ) . Otherwise you too will become like them . Surely Allah will assemble the hypocrites and the disbelievers together in Hell .
Those ( hypocrites ) who pry into your ( victory and setback ) , then if you are granted victory by Allah , they say : Were we not with you ? And if the disbelievers get a portion ( of some apparent breakthrough ) , they say ( to them ) : Did we not get the better of you and ( in spite of that ) did we not save you from ( ruin at the hands of ) Muslims ? So , Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection and never will Allah allow the disbelievers anyway to ( overpower ) the Muslims .
Surly the hypocrites ( self - deluding ) seek to deceive Allah while He is to make them suffer for their ( own ) deception . And when they stand up for Prayer , they do it sluggishly , ( simply ) for showing off to the people . And they ( also ) remember Allah but little .
Confounded between ( belief and disbelief ) , they belong neither to ( the disbelievers ) nor to ( the believers ) . And he whom Allah holds astray you shall not find for him any road ( to guidance ) .
O Believers ! Make not friends with disbelievers instead of believers . Do you wish to set a manifest evidence for Allah against you ( through friendship with the disbelievers ) ?
The hypocrites will surely be in the lowest depth of Hell and you will never find for them any helper .
But those who repent , make amends , and establish a firm bond with Allah , and make their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely for Allah will be in the company of the believers . And Allah will soon bestow a tremendous reward upon the believers .
Why should Allah torment you if you become grateful and believe ? And Allah is Most Appreciative ( of every truth ) , Well Aware ( of every act ) .
Allah does not like anyones foul words being voiced loud ( publicly and openly ) except by one who has been a victim of oppression ; ( he is allowed to expose the cruelty of the oppressor ; ) and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Whether you make a good act known or keep it hidden or excuse some ( ones ) evil act , Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , All - Powerful .
Surely , those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and seek to discriminate between Allah and His Messengers and say : We believe in some and deny the others , and intend to find a way in between ( belief and disbelief ) .
They are the ones who are in fact the disbelievers . And We have prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
But those who believed in Allah and ( all ) His Messengers and , ( in embracing faith , ) made no distinction between any of these ( Messengers ) , He would soon pay them their rewards . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Beloved ! ) The People of the Book ask you to bring down to them a Book from heaven ( completely inscribed in one go ) . They asked Musa ( Moses ) for something even greater than that ; they said : Show us Allah visibly ( in Person ) . So owing to ( their ) transgression ( i . e . this denigrating demand ) a thunderbolt seized them . ( They died and were later raised to life by Musas ( Moses ) prayer . ) Then they adopted the calf ( as their god ) after the clear Signs ( pointing to the Truth ) had reached them . Then We overlooked this ( sin ) as well and bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) a marked dominance over them .
And ( when the Jews again rejected the injunctions contained in the Torah , ) We raised ( and suspended the Mount of ) Tur over them in order to take a ( firm ) promise from them . And We commanded them : Enter the gate ( of this city - the Ailia gate ) prostrating ( in gratitude ) , and We ( also ) said to them : Do not also violate the Sabbath ( prohibition of fishing on Saturday ) , and We took from them a reiterated and firm promise .
So ( they were afflicted with punishments ) because of their breaking the promise , rejecting the Revelations of Allah , killing the Prophets unjustly ( and also owing to ) their saying : Our hearts are ( wrapped ) in covers . ( Nay , that was not the truth ; ) the fact is that Allah has sealed their hearts due to their disbelief . So , except for a few , they will not accept faith .
And ( moreover ) owing to their rejection of faith and uttering against Maryam ( Mary ) a grave calumny .
And ( also ) because of their uttering ( the boastful claim ) : We ( have ) killed Allahs Messenger , the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , whereas they neither killed nor crucified him . But ( in truth ) someone was made the like ( of Isa Jesus ) in their view . But those who disagree about him have surely fallen prey to doubt ( concerning ) this ( murder ) . They know nothing ( what the truth is ) except ( that they are ) following fancy . And they certainly did not murder Isa ( Jesus ) .
In fact Allah lifted him up towards Himself ( in heaven ) and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And , ( shortly before the Last Hour at the time of the Messiahs descent , ) there will not be any ( individual or sect ) of the People of the Book but will ( rightly ) believe in Isa ( Jesus ) before his death ; and Isa ( Jesus ) will bear witness to them on the Day of Resurrection .
Then on account of injustice on the part of the Jews , We made unlawful for them ( many ) pure provisions that had been made lawful for them ( before ) , and ( also ) for the reason that they hindered ( people ) at a large scale from the path of Allah .
And ( also ) because of their taking usury , despite that they were forbidden to do it , and because of their usurping others wealth wrongfully ( they were punished ) . And We have prepared a torturous torment for those of them who disbelieve .
But those among them who possess substantial knowledge and faith ( equally ) believe in ( the Revelation ) that has been sent down to you and ( the Revelation ) that was sent down before you . And ( how righteous they are ! ) they establish the Prayer regularly , and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) persistently , and keep faith in Allah and the Day of Resurrection . They are the ones who We shall soon pay a mighty wage .
( O Beloved ! ) Indeed We have sent Revelation to you as We sent it to Nuh ( Noah ) and ( other ) Messengers after him ; and We also sent Revelation to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and ( his ) children and Isa ( Jesus ) , Ayyub ( Job ) , Yunus ( Jonah ) , Harun ( Aaron ) and Sulaiman ( Solomon ) ; and We conferred the Zabur ( Book of Psalms ) upon Dawud ( David ) .
And ( We have sent many ) Messengers whose annals We have narrated to you earlier ; and We sent ( a number of ) those Messengers whose details We have not ( yet ) related to you ; and Allah ( also ) spoke to Musa ( [ Moses ] directly ) .
The Messengers who were Bearers of good news and Warners ( were sent ) so that after ( the arrival of these ) Messengers people may not have any plea against Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
( O Beloved ! Whether somebody believes in your Prophethood or not , ) Allah ( Himself ) bears witness to ( this fact that ) whatever He has sent down to you has sent down with His knowledge . And the angels ( too ) bear witness to that effect ( for your sake ) , and Allah is All - Sufficient as a witness .
Verily , those who disbelieved ( i . e . belied the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and hindered ( people ) from the path of Allah , they undoubtedly went far astray ( from the Truth ) .
Indeed those who have disbelieved ( by denying Allahs witness ) and done injustice ( by denying the Messengers glory ) , Allah will by no means forgive them , nor will show them any path ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
Except the path of Hell wherein they shall dwell beyond the count of time and that is easy for Allah .
O mankind ! Indeed this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) has come to you with the Truth from your Lord . So believe ( in him ) for your own good . But if you disbelieve ( i . e . deny his Prophethood then bear in mind that He is Beyond Any Need of you because ) whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah indeed . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
O People of the Book ! Exceed not the limits in your Din ( Religion ) and speak nothing but the truth about Allahs glory . The fact is simple that the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is Allahs Messenger and His Word which He conveyed to Maryam ( Mary ) and a Spirit from Him . So believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not say : There are three ( Gods ) . Refrain ( from this belief ) ; ( that ) is best for you . Verily , Allah is the Only One God , Holy is He , far above having a son . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone . And Sufficient is Allah as Guardian .
The Messiah feels no embarrassment in being a servant of Allah . Nor do the closest angels ( ever feel ashamed ) . And whoever disdains to be His servant and perpetrates arrogance , He will soon assemble together all such people before Him .
So those who believe and persist in doing pious deeds He will pay them their wages in full and will ( then ) award them more out of His Bounty . But those who disdain ( worshipping Allah ) and behave arrogantly , He will punish them with grievous torment , and they will not find for them any friend or helper besides Allah .
O mankind ! ( The most vital , perfect , clear and ) a conclusive evidence has reached you from your ( Ever - Glorious and Most Exalted ) Lord ( in the form of the Holy Being of the Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . And ( besides ) We have ( also ) sent down to you the brightening and radiant light ( in the shape of the Holy Quran ) .
So , those who believe in Allah and hold fast to His ( embrace , Allah ) will soon admit them to His ( exceptional ) Mercy and Grace and will show them the straight path to ( reach ) Him .
They seek edict ( i . e . judgment under Islamic Law ) from you . Say : Allah ordains pertaining to ( the inheritance of ) kalala ( the deceased leaving neither children nor parents behind ) : If a man dies childless but has one sister , she shall have ( as her share ) half ( the property ) that he leaves . ( If , on the contrary , a sister is kalala , then in the case of her death ) the brother will be ( the sole ) heir ( to his sister ) , if she has no children . Then if ( after a kalala brothers death ) two ( sisters ) are ( the heirs ) , they are entitled to share two - thirds of ( the property ) he leaves . And if ( in the case of the deceased who is kalala ) he has some brothers and sisters , male ( as well as ) female heirs , then the share of each male shall be as much as the ( portion of ) two females . Allah is clearly explaining to you ( these laws ) lest you should go astray . And Allah knows everything well .
O Believers ! Fulfil ( your ) promises . The quadrupeds ( i . e . cattle ) have been made lawful for you except those ( animals ) that will be announced to you afterwards . ( But ) when clad in Ihram ( the Pilgrims sacred dress ) , do not presume hunting lawful . Surely Allah ordains what He wills .
O Believers ! Do not denigrate the Signs of Allah , nor the sacred ( and venerable ) month ( i . e . anyone of Dhul - Qada , Dhul - Hijja , Muharram and Rajab ) , nor the sacrificial animals sent to the Sacred House the Kaba and nor the animals brought to Makka with ritual straps around their necks . Also do not violate the sanctity of ( life and property , and honour and dignity of ) those resorting to the Sacred House the Kaba , ( for they are the ones ) seeking bounty and pleasure of their Lord . And when you take off Ihram ( the Pilgrims garb ) , then you are allowed to hunt . And never let the enmity of a people incite you to aggression ( against them ) since they barred you from the Sacred House ( i . e . visiting the Kaba ) . And always support one another in ( the works of ) righteousness and piety but do not become accomplices in ( works of ) sin and transgression . And fear Allah persistently . Indeed Allah awards severe punishment ( to those who disobey and defy ) .
Forbidden to you is carrion ( the animal that dies and is not slaughtered according to Islamic Law ) and ( the discharged ) blood and pork and that ( animal ) on which the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked while slaughtering , and ( the animal ) that dies by strangling or by a violent blow ( not by any sharp instrument ) or by falling from a height or the one that has been gored to death or which has been ripped apart and gnawed by a wild beast , save the one which you slaughter ( before it dies ) , and ( that animal too is forbidden ) which has been slaughtered on idolatrous altars ( dedicated to false gods ) . And this ( is also unlawful ) that you learn your fortune through raffling ( with arrows or divide shares by such means ) . All these works are sins .
This day the disbelievers have lost all hopes of ( their heinous designs because ) your Din ( [ Religion ] has prevailed ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fear them not and always fear Me alone .
Today I have perfected your Din ( Religion ) for you , and have completed My Blessing upon you , and have chosen for you Islam ( as ) Din ( a complete code of life ) . Then if one gets into a survival situation ( forced by ) ravenous hunger ( and intense thirst i . e . driven by dire necessity , provided ) he is not prone to sinning ( i . e . eats what is forbidden without being wilfully inclined to sin ) , then Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
People ask you what has been made lawful for them . Say ( to them ) : The pure provisions are declared lawful for you . And the hunting animals that you have tamed running after game and , this way , teach them ( the methods of hunting ) which Allah has taught you ; so eat ( also ) of that ( prey ) which the hunting animals hold on for you ( after hunting ) . And pronounce the Name of Allah over that ( hunting beast when you unleash it for hunting ) . And keep fearing Allah . Indeed Allah is Swift in calling to account .
This day good and pure things have been made lawful for you . And the sacrificed animal of those given the ( Revealed ) Book is ( also ) lawful for you , while your sacrificed animal is lawful for them . And ( likewise ) chaste Muslim women as well as chaste women from amongst those given the Book before you ( are lawful for you ) when you have paid them their dower , ( provided ) you marry them for a conjugal life ( adhering to chasteness and decency ) and not for open lasciviousness ( merely satisfying your lust ) , nor for secret love affairs . The one who denies faith ( in the Commandments of Allah ) , all his work is ruined and he will ( also ) be among the losers in the Hereafter .
O Believers ! When ( you intend ) to stand for Prayer then ( for ablution ) wash your faces and hands up to the elbows , and pass your wet hands over your heads and ( also wash ) your feet up to the ankles . And if you are in a state of obligation for total ablution , purify yourselves well ( by bathing ) . Should you be ill or on a journey , or someone of you comes ( after ) defecation , or you have had sexual contact ( intercourse ) with women and then you do not find water , ( in these cases , ) perform tayammum with clean soil . So , it is wiping your faces and ( full ) hands with it ( i . e . clean soil ) . Allah does not want to make things anyway hard for you , but He wants to purify you , and complete the bestowal of His Favour upon you so that you may become grateful .
And call to mind the Favour of Allah ( conferred ) upon you , and ( also recall ) the promise which He took from you ( under affirmation ) when you declared ( agreeing ) : We heard ( Allahs Command ) and we obeyed ( it ) . And always fear Allah . Verily Allah knows best ( the secrets of ) hearts .
O Believers ! Holding fast to the cause of Allah , bear witness based on justice . And let not ( even ) the extreme hostility against a people provoke you into abstaining from justice ( in their case ) . Always do justice , ( for ) it is akin to piousness . And fear Allah . Indeed Allah is Well Aware of your works .
Allah has promised forgiveness and a mighty reward for those who believe and persist in piety and righteous actions .
But those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , they are the people who will be ( on fire ) in Hell .
O Believers ! Call to mind ( that ) Favour of Allah ( which ) was bestowed upon you when a people ( who disbelieved ) resolved to stretch out their hands against you ( for killing and destruction ) but Allah held back their hands from you . And always fear Allah ; and the believers must always rely on Allah alone .
And indeed Allah took a firm promise from the Children of Israel and We appointed among them twelve chieftains ( for its fulfilment , enforcement and protection ) . And Allah said ( to the Children of Israel ) : I am with you ( i . e . My special support and reinforcement will escort you ) . If you establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) consistently , and ( always ) adhere to believing in My Messengers , and furnish persistent support to their ( Prophetic Mission ) , and lend Allah a handsome loan ( for financing , promotion and prevalence of His Din [ Religion ] ) , I will certainly remove your sins from you , and will assuredly admit you to the Gardens with streams flowing beneath . Then , later , whoever from among you rejects faith ( i . e . violates the promise ) indeed strays from the straight path .
Then We laid Our curse on them because of their breach of promise ( i . e . they were deprived of Our Mercy ) , and We made their hearts callous ( i . e . they were deprived of guidance and susceptibility . So , ) they change the Words ( of Allahs Book ) from their ( right ) places and have forgotten a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . And you will continue being informed about one or the other of their treachery , except a few of them ( who have embraced faith ) . So pardon them and forbear . Indeed Allah loves the benefactors .
And We ( also ) took a ( similar ) promise from those who say : We are Christians . Then , they ( too ) forgot a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . So , ( owing to this breach of promise , ) We infected them with mutual hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . And Allah will soon unveil to them ( the reality of the acts ) which they used to perpetrate .
O People of the Book ! Indeed there has come to you Our Messenger who unfolds to you ( clearly ) many such things from the Book as you have been concealing and who overlooks many of ( your ) wrongs ( too ) . There has indeed come to you a light from Allah ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and an Enlightening Book ( i . e . the Holy Quran ) .
By this Allah guides those who seek His pleasure to the paths to peace ( and security ) , and takes them out of darkness ( of ignorance and disbelief ) by His Command , and leads them to the light ( of faith and guidance ) and directs them towards the straight road .
They have indeed committed disbelief who say : Verily , Allah is ( but ) the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) . Say : Who is then ( the one ) who can possess a bit ( of the will ) of Allah . If He should so decide as to destroy Messiah son of Maryam and his mother and all that are on earth , ( who can save them against His will ) ? And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them , ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . He creates what He wills and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And the Jews and the Christians say : We are the sons of Allah and His beloved ones . Say : ( If your statement is correct ) then why does He punish you for your sins ? Rather ( the truth is that ) of all ( the Creation ) Allah has brought into being , you ( too ) are ( but ) a human being ( i . e . just like other human species ) . He forgives whom He pleases and chastises whom He wills . And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them ( all ) belongs to Allah alone and to Him ( everyone ) has to return .
O People of the Book ! Indeed Our ( Last ) Prophet has come to you ( at the juncture ) when ( the chain of ) Messengers succession is breaking off , and he expounds to you ( Our Commands and Injunctions ) with ample clarity , ( because ) you may ( by way of excuse ) say : There has come to us no Bearer of good news or a Warner . ( Now this excuse of yours has also lost ground because ) undoubtedly ( the Final ) Bearer of glad tidings and Warner has come to you , and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And ( recall the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people ! Recollect the blessing Allah ( bestowed ) upon you when He raised Prophets from amongst you and made you kings and gave ( so ) much to you which He had not given to anyone else in all the worlds ( in your contemporary period ) .
O my people ! Enter the holy land ( of Syria or Bait al - Maqdis [ Jerusalem ] ) which Allah has decreed for you , and do not turn back ( in retreat ) or you will turn back as losers .
They said ( in reply ) : O Musa ( Moses ) ! There are mighty ( tyrant ) people ( living ) therein , and we shall never enter this ( land ) until they quit it . So , if they depart from here then we will certainly enter it .
Two men from among ( a few ) who feared ( Allah ) and whom Allah had favoured with His Blessing ( said to their folk : ) Enter the gate ( of the city invading ) these people ( dauntlessly ) . Once you enter this ( gate ) , you will certainly be victorious . And put your trust in Allah alone provided you are people of faith .
They said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Never shall we enter this ( land ) so long as they are in it . So you ( along with ) your Lord go and fight ( against them ) ; we are sitting right here .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) submitted : My Lord ! I have no control ( over anyone ) except for myself and my brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) . So put us apart from ( these ) wicked people ( by Your Command ) .
( The Lord ) said : So this ( land ) is forbidden to these ( rebels ) for forty years . ( Anguished , ) they will keep wandering around the earth distractedly . So you will not grieve , ( O Musa , [ Moses ] ) over the ( warning plight ) of these disobedient and unruly people .
( O Most Esteemed Messenger ! ) Relate to these people the account of two sons of Adam ( Habil and Qabil [ Abel and Cain ] ) which is absolutely true . When both of them made offering ( one each to Allah ) , the offering from one of them ( Habil [ Abel ] ) was accepted while that from the other ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) was not accepted . Thereupon , he ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) said to Habil ( Abel out of jealousy and vengeance ) : I will surely kill you . He ( Habil [ Abel ] ) said ( in reply ) : Indeed , Allah accepts ( offering ) only from the self - protecting .
If you stretch forth your hand against me to kill me , ( even then ) I shall not stretch out my hand against you in order to kill you because I fear Allah , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
I want ( I commit no offence and ) you take my sin ( i . e . sin of killing me ) , and also your own sin ( the preceding one on account of which your offering has been rejected all ) on you . You will then become one of the inmates of Hell . And that is but the punishment of the wrongdoers .
Then the ( ill - commanding ) self of Qabil ( Cain ) made the killing of his brother Habil ( Abel ) easy ( and tempting ) for him . So , he killed him and became one of the losers .
Then Allah sent a crow that started scratching the earth to show him how to hide his brothers corpse . ( Seeing this , ) he said : Alas ! Could I not become even the like of this crow that I might hide the corpse of my brother ! So he became one of the remorseful people .
On account of this We prescribed ( this Commandment in the Torah sent down ) to the Children of Israel that whoever killed a person ( unjustly ) , except as a punishment for murder or for ( spreading ) disorder in the land ( i . e . punishment for bloodshed and robbery etc . ) , it would be as if he killed all the people ( of society ) ; and whoever ( saved him from unjust murder and ) made him survive , it would be as if he saved the lives of all the people ( of society ; i . e . he rescued the collective system of human life ) . And indeed Our Messengers came to them with evident Signs . Yet , even after that , the majority from among these people are certainly those who commit excesses in the land .
Indeed those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and remain engaged in creating mischief in the land ( i . e . perpetrate terrorism , robbery and burglary among the Muslims ) , their punishment is that they be slain , or hanged to death , or their hands and their feet on opposite sides be cut off , or they be exiled far from ( i . e . deprived of moving about in ) the homeland ( i . e . either by banishment or by imprisonment ) . That is the humiliation for them in this world , and for them there is a terrible torment in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Except those who turn to Allah in repentance before you overpower them . So , know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fear Allah persistently and keep looking for means to ( approach and get closer to ) Him and strive hard in His way so that you may prosper .
Assuredly those who disbelieve , if they possess all ( the riches and treasures ) that exist in the earth , and even with it as much more so that they may offer it as ransom ( a recompense for their souls to redeem themselves ) from the torment of the Day of Resurrection , ( all that too ) will not be accepted from them and there is a torturous punishment for them .
They will desire to get out of Hell ( somehow ) , whereas they will not be able to get out of it . And their torment will be eternal .
( After proper judicial trial as per law ) cut off the hands of both the man as well as the woman who steal , in retribution of ( the offence ) which they have committed , a deterring punishment from Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Then the one who repents after ( this ) wrong and mends his ways , Allah surely turns towards him in Mercy . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O man ! ) Do you not know that ( the Absolute ) Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone ? He torments whom He wills and forgives whom He pleases and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
O Messenger ! Those , who ( advance ) fast into disbelief , should not grieve you . ( Firstly ) they include those ( hypocrites ) who utter from their mouth : We believe , while their hearts have not accepted faith . ( Secondly ) among them are the Jews . They listen to ( you ) eagerly to fabricate lies . They ( in fact ) hear ( to spy ) for others who have not ( yet ) come to you . ( They are the people ) who change the Words ( of Allah even ) after their contexts ( are fixed and ) say : If you are given this ( command which they like ) , take it , and if you are not given this ( command ) , then keep off ( it ) . And if Allah adjudges someone to go astray then you do not have any power for him ( to hold up the Command of ) Allah . They are the ones whose hearts Allah has no intention whatsoever to purify . For them there is ignominy ( of disbelief ) in this world and mighty punishment in the Hereafter .
( They ) are the ones who spy to coin lies . ( Moreover , ) they voraciously devour unlawful wealth and property . If they approach you ( with a dispute for judgment ) then it is ( up to ) you whether to judge between them or decline . And if you opt to keep away from them ( even then ) they are incapable of doing you any harm but if you judge , then judge between them ( too but ) with justice ( i . e . their enmity should not restrain judgment based on justice ) . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who do justice .
And how can they accept you as a judge while they have the Torah with them wherein is ( revealed ) the Commandment of Allah ? Yet they turn away ( from the Truth even ) after that . And they are the ones who will not ( at all ) embrace faith .
Indeed , We revealed the Torah wherein was guidance and light . In accordance with that the Messengers who were the obedient ( servants of Allah ) used to give orders to the Jews . And the divines ( i . e . their spiritual masters ) and the rabbis ( also judged in accordance with that ) because they were assigned to safeguard the Book of Allah and they were the guardians of ( and witness to ) it . So do not fear people ( in establishing Din [ Religion ] and enforcing Allahs Commandments ) , and always fear Me ( alone ) , and do not barter My Signs ( Commands ) for a paltry price ( of this world ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) according to the Injunctions sent down by Allah , it is they who are disbelievers .
In that ( the Torah ) We had prescribed for them : A life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , an ear for an ear , and a tooth for a tooth and in the case of injuries ( too ) there is a requital . But the person who ( foregoes ) this ( requital ) by way of charity , this will serve as an atonement for his ( sins ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) in compliance with the Commandments sent down by Allah , it is they who are the transgressors .
And following in the footsteps of these ( Messengers ) We sent Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) confirming the Book ( the Torah ) revealed before him . And We gave him the Injil ( the Gospel ) which contained guidance and light , and ( the Injil [ the Gospel ] too ) confirmed the ( Book ) Torah that preceded it . And it was ( an absolute ) guidance and admonition for the Godfearing .
And the people of the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] too ) are required to judge in accordance with that ( Commandment ) which Allah has sent down in it . And he who does not judge ( and run the state ) complying with the commandments Allah has revealed , it is they who are unruly and wicked .
And , ( O Most Esteemed Messenger , ) We have revealed the Book to you ( also ) with the Truth which confirms the Book that preceded it and stands as a guardian over ( the actual commands and contents contained in ) it . So judge between them according to these ( Commandments ) which Allah has revealed . And do not follow their desires turning away from the Truth that has come to you . We have designed for each one of you a discrete law and an all - embracing way of life . Had Allah so willed , He would have made you all one Umma ( [ Community ] agreeing to the same law ) . But He wants to test you in these ( separately given sets of Commandments ) which He has given you ( suiting your respective life situations ) . So , make haste in doing pious works . To Allah have you all to return . He will then enlighten you on ( the Truth and falsehood in all the matters ) in which you used to disagree .
And , ( O Beloved , We have enjoined that ) you should judge between them by this ( Commandment ) which Allah has revealed and do not follow their desires . And be on your guard against them lest they tempt you away from any of ( the commandments ) which Allah has revealed to you . But if they turn away ( from your judgment ) then know that Allah intends to punish them for some of their sins . And most of the people are unruly and disobedient .
Do they seek the law of ( the days of ) ignorance ? And who is better than Allah in ( giving ) judgment for a people who have firm faith ?
O Believers ! Do not make friends with the Jews and the Christians . They ( all ) are friends to one another ( against you ) . And whoever of you makes friends with them will ( also ) become one of them . Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
So you will see those whose hearts are diseased ( with hypocrisy and minds infected with slavery ) that they run to ( join the Jews and the Christians and ) say : We fear lest the wheel of fate turns against us ( i . e . it is likely to get under the security umbrella by allying with them ) . But it is not far from possible that Allah ( really ) blesses ( the Muslims ) with victory or may ( send ) from His side a decree ( as a sign of success and victory ) . Then they will feel ashamed of ( the hypocritical thinking ) they have concealed in their hearts .
And ( at that time ) the believers will say : Is it they who swore by Allah ( by way of ) solemn oaths that they were certainly with you ( alone ) ? ( But ) all their deeds have gone void . So they have become the losers .
O Believers ! Whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) , Allah will soon bring ( in their place ) a people He will ( Himself ) love and who will love Him . They will be kind ( and humble ) towards the believers ( but ) strict ( and firm ) towards the disbelievers . They will toil ( very hard ) in the way of Allah and will never fear any reproaches of the reprovers . This ( revolutionary character ) is the Grace of Allah which He grants whom He wills , and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Indeed your ( helper ) friend is only Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ( as well ) who persevere in offering Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and they are those who prostrate themselves ( with extreme submissiveness before the Presence of Allah ) .
And the one who makes friends with Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers then ( they are the people who are Allahs party ) , and ( it is the people of ) Allahs party who will surely overmaster .
O Believers ! Do not take those for friends who have made fun and sport of your Din ( Religion ) from among those who were given the Book before you and the disbelievers . And fear Allah persistently if you are ( truly ) the men of faith .
And when you call ( the people ) to Prayer ( by means of the Adhan the call to Prayer ) , these ( people ) take it as fun and sport because they are a people who have no sense ( at all ) .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Say : O People of the Book ! What has made you cynic about us except that we believe in Allah and this ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and those ( Books ) which have been sent down before it ? And surely the majority of you are defiant and disobedient .
Say : Shall I apprise you of him who , in the matter of punishment , is worse in the sight of Allah than ( the one you regard the most despised ? And it is he ) whom Allah has cursed , whom He has shown His wrath , and He has transformed ( some ) of these ( evil people ) into apes and ( others into ) swines ; and ( he is such a person ) as has ( obeyed and ) worshipped Satan . They are the people who are the most wretched as for their dwelling , and far more astray from the straight path .
And when those ( hypocrites ) come to you , they say : We have believed , while they entered ( your company ) with disbelief and left with the same ( disbelief ) . And Allah knows best ( the matters ) which they carry hidden .
And you will see the majority of them hurrying towards sins and excesses and eagerly devouring what is forbidden ( and unlawful ) . Most evil indeed is all that they are doing .
Why do the divines ( spiritual masters ) and rabbis abstain from forbidding them from their sinful speech and eating unlawful things ? Certainly what all they are contriving ( by abstaining from raising voices against evil ) is most heinous .
And the Jews say : Allahs hand is tied up ( as if God forbid ! He is niggardly ) . Tied up be their ( own ) hands and they have been cursed for what they have uttered ! ( The truth is that ) both His hands are stretched out wide open ( in showering His bounties and blessings ) . He spends ( i . e . bestows His blessings on His servants ) as He desires . And , ( O Beloved , ) the ( Book ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord will certainly bolster up most of them in rebellion and disbelief ( due to jealousy ) . And We have put among them hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . Whenever these people kindle the fire of war , Allah puts it out . And they are engaged in spreading mischief and disorder ( everywhere ) on the earth and Allah does not like those who spread mischief .
And if the People of the Book had believed ( in Muhammad , the Messenger , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) and adopted Godwariness , We would have removed all their sins ( from their record ) , and would surely have admitted them to the blissful Gardens .
And had they established ( their systems by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever ( more ) was sent down to them from their Lord , they would have ( been provided with the material resources so abundantly that they would have ) received sustenance from above and from beneath their feet ( as well , but the sustenance would never have exhausted ) . A section among them are moderate ( i . e . they like the middle way ) , but what most of them are doing is extreme wickedness .
O ( Esteemed ) Messenger ! Communicate ( to the people all ) that has been revealed to you from your Lord . And if you did not do ( so ) then you would not deliver the Message of the Lord . And Allah will ( Himself ) protect your ( life ) from the ( hostile ) people . Surely Allah does not show the path of guidance to those who disbelieve .
Say : O People of the Book , you are nowhere ( on the path of Din [ Religion ] ) until you establish ( the system by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever has been sent down to you from your Lord . And , ( O Beloved , ) the Book which has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly provoke rebellion and disbelief among most of them ( because of jealousy ) . So do not grieve over ( the state of affairs of ) the disbelievers .
Indeed ( those who call themselves ) the Muslims , the Jews , the Sabeans ( worshippers of stars ) and the Christians , all who believe ( true - heartedly in accordance with the teachings of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) in Allah and the Last Day , and practise piety steadfastly shall have neither any fear nor grief .
Surely We took promise from the Children of Israel ( too ) and ( also ) sent ( many ) Messengers towards them ( but ) every time a Messenger brought to them a commandment which their ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , they belied a party ( of the Messengers ) and slew the other ( in succession ) .
And ( besides ) they held the view that ( killing or belying the Messengers ) would not result into any torment . So they became blind and deaf . Allah , then , accepted their repentance . But most of them ( again ) turned blind and deaf ( i . e . incapable of perceiving the truth by seeing and hearing ) . And Allah is Ever Watchful of what they are doing .
In fact they have become disbelievers who say : Allah is the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , whereas the Messiah ( himself ) said : O Children of Israel ! Worship Allah Who is my ( as well as ) your Lord . Indeed Allah has forbidden Paradise to him who associates partners with Him . And Hell is his abode and the wrongdoers will not find any helpers .
Certainly they ( also ) become disbelievers who say : Allah is the third of the three ( Gods ) , whereas there is none worthy of worship except the One God . If they do not desist from ( the absurdity ) which they utter , a grievous punishment will surely torment those of them who disbelieve .
Will they not turn towards Allah ( in repentance ) and beg forgiveness from Him ? For Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , is ( nothing ) but a Messenger ( neither a god nor a son of God , and nor His partner ) . Many Messengers have indeed preceded him and his mother was a paragon of truth ( saintly person ) . Both ( were mortal creatures as they ) used to eat food . ( O Beloved ! ) Observe how clearly We explain the Revelations for their ( guidance ) but again observe how ( in spite of that ) they are turning away ( from the Truth ) .
Say : Do you worship besides Allah someone that has no power to do you any harm or good ? Allah is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : O People of the Book ! Do not unjustly exceed limits in your Din ( Religion ) , nor follow the desires of those who lost the straight path ( before Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and ( also ) caused a number of ( others ) to go astray and remained deviated from the straight road ( even after Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of Dawud ( David ) and Isa , son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) . That is because they disobeyed and transgressed .
( And they were cursed also because ) they would not prevent one another from the evil deeds they used to do . Evil certainly were the deeds that they used to do .
You will see most of them befriending the disbelievers . How evil that is which they have sent forward for their ( accountability on the Last Day ) and ( that is ) that Allah is ( highly ) displeased with them and they will suffer from the torment forever !
And had they believed in Allah and the ( Last ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the ( Book ) that has been revealed to him , they would not have made friends with those ( enemies of Islam ) . But most of them are disobedient .
You will indeed find the Jews and the polytheists the bitterest of people in their enmity against the Muslims , and the closest in love and affection for the Muslims you will find those who say : Indeed we are Nazarenes ( Christians ) . This is because among them are savants ( i . e . scholars of Sharia ) as well as monks ( i . e . ascetic worshippers ) and ( moreover ) they are not given to arrogance .
And ( that is the reason ) when ( some of the true Christians ) listen to this ( Holy Quran ) which has been revealed to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you see their eyes overflowing with tears . ( This overflowing of tears ) springs from the Truth of which they have ( gained ) gnosis . ( Besides ) they submit : O our Lord ! We have believed ( in the Truth which You have revealed ) , so inscribe us ( also ) among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
And what is the matter with us that we should not believe in Allah and the Truth ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and the Holy Quran ) which has come to us , while we ( too ) cherish ( this ) strong ambition that our Lord admit us ( to His Mercy and Paradise ) along with the most pious ?
So Allah rewarded them with Gardens , with streams flowing under them , in recompense of the submission they made ( like a true believer . They ) will live there forever and that is the wage of the righteous .
But those who disbelieve and belie Our Revelations , it is they who are ( the inmates ) of Hell .
O Believers ! Do not make ( for yourselves ) unlawful those pure things which Allah has made lawful for you and do not exceed limits either . Indeed Allah does not like those who transgress the prescribed bounds .
And eat of the pure and lawful things which Allah has provided for you with and always fear Allah Whom you believe in .
Allah does not persecute you for your purposeless ( and frivolous ) oaths , but takes you to task for your ( solemn ) oaths which you affirm ( deliberately ) . ( If you breach such oaths ) the atonement is feeding ten poor persons with an average ( quality ) food which you serve to your family , or providing them ( i . e . the poor ) with the clothes , or freeing one neck ( a slave or slave girl ) . But the one who does not find ( all this ) shall fast for three days . This is the atonement for your oaths which you affirm ( and then break ) . So , always guard your oaths . It is this way Allah explains most clearly His Revelations to you so that you may become grateful ( by obeying His Commandments ) .
O Believers ! Wine and gambling and idols mounted ( for worship ) and divining arrows ( for seeking luck , all ) are filthy works of Satan . So turn away from them ( completely ) so that you may prosper .
Satan seeks only to breed enmity and spite among you by means of wine and gambling and hinder you from remembering Allah and observing Prayer . Will you abstain ( from these evil - generating temptations ) ?
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and be on your guard ( against opposition to Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . But if you turn away , then you should know that the responsibility of Our Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is only to deliver ( the commandments ) clearly ( and he has accomplished this duty . )
There is no sin on those who believe and do righteous deeds with regard to what they have eaten ( of the unlawful things before the Command of Prohibitions came ) , whereas ( in all other matters ) they were Godwary and put firm faith ( in other Commandments of Allah ) , and practised pious deeds consistently . Later , ( also after the Revelation of the Prohibitions , ) they desisted from ( all the unlawful things ) and believed ( true - heartedly in their unlawfulness ) , became men of piety and God - wariness and ( finally ) rose to the station of men of Spiritual Excellence ( i . e . Allahs beloved , favourite , intimate and righteous servants ) . And Allah loves those who live with spiritual excellence .
O Believers ! Allah will certainly test you by means of ( some ) game animals your hands and your lances can reach so that Allah makes him identifiable who fears Him in secret . Then whoever transgresses ( even ) after that , for him is painful chastisement .
O Believers ! Do not kill game while you are in Pilgrim attire ( Ihram ) . Whoever of you ( Pilgrim - clad ) kills it intentionally will recompense ( it ) in kind of cattle equivalent to the one he has killed . In this regard , two men of probity out of you are to judge ( whether this animal is really the games equal , provided ) that offering is to be brought to the Kaba . Or its atonement is feeding a few indigent persons ( i . e . usual food for the number of poor people manageable in the animals cost ) , or fasting corresponding to that ( number of days manageable within the same food meant for the poor , ) so that he tastes the ( gravity ) of his offence . Allah has forgiven whatever has bygone earlier ( to it ) , but whoever repeats ( a similar act ) Allah will avenge ( his defiance ) . And Allah is Mighty , the Lord of Retribution .
The game of the sea and its eating has been made lawful for your and the travellers benefit , but the game of the land has been prohibited for you so long as you are in the Pilgrim dress ( Ihram ) . And always fear Allah towards Whose ( Presence ) you ( all ) will be assembled .
Allah has made the Kaba , the sacred ( and venerable ) House , a means to keep ( peace in the spiritual and worldly matters of ) the people . And also the Sacred Month , the animals of offerings to the Holy Kaba and the animals with collars symbolic of sacrifice around their necks ( brought into the sacred confines of Makka , all have been granted sanctity and veneration by virtue of the same affinity ) ; that is to make you know that Allah has best knowledge of whatever there is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and Allah is Well - Aware of everything .
Know that Allah is Severe in Punishment and that Allah is Most Forgiving and Ever - Merciful ( as well ) .
The Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] has ( no other responsibility ) but to communicate ( the Revealed Commands with absolute perfection ) . And Allah knows ( all ) that you make known and that you hide .
Say : ( Both ) the pure and the impure can never be alike , ( O listener , ) even though the abundance of the polluted and foul ( objects ) may fascinate you . So , ( instead of monitoring the difference of abundance and scarcity ) fear Allah , O men of wisdom , so that you may flourish and prosper .
O Believers ! Do not ask about things ( on which the Quran is quiet , ) for if they are disclosed to you , they may put you in strain ( and you will be disgusted by them ) . But if you enquire about them while the Quran is being sent down , they will be disclosed to you ( i . e . fixated through revealing the Commandments , but this will put an end to your choice of discretion , binding you only to one Command ) . Allah has ( so far ) overlooked ( these matters and questions ) , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
No doubt a people before you asked about similar things but ( when they were disclosed to them ) they denied them .
Allah has not made ( lawful in the Sharia a cattle dedicated to idols ) , such as a Bahira , a Saiba , a Wasila or a Ham . But the disbelievers fabricate lies against Allah and most of them do not have sense .
And when it is said to them : Turn towards this ( Quran ) revealed by Allah and towards the ( most venerable ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they say : Sufficient for us is ( the way ) on which we found our fathers , though their fathers did not have any knowledge ( of Din [ Religion ] ) , nor were they rightly guided .
O Believers ! Take care of your own selves . No one who goes astray can do you harm provided you have become rightly guided . All of you have to return to Allah alone . He will then apprise you of ( the works ) that you used to do .
O Believers ! When death approaches anyone of you , then at the time of making a bequest there should be two men of probity from amongst you ( for ) taking testimony or ( any ) two men from among others if you are travelling in the land . If ( in the meanwhile ) the agony of death overtakes you , detain both of them after Prayer . If you suspect ( them ) they shall both swear by Allah : We shall not sell it for any price , even though one is a ( very close ) relative , nor shall we conceal the testimony ( ordained ) by Allah . ( If we hide it , ) we shall be among sinners there and then .
But if it is learnt later that both of them have earned sin ( owing to concealing the true witness ) , then , in their stead , two other ( witnesses ) should rise from among those whose right the two former ( witnesses ) have seized . ( Let them both be closer relatives of the deceased . ) They should then swear by Allah : Indeed our testimony is truer than the testimony of both of them ; we are not transgressing the bounds ( of Truth ) . ( If we do so ) we shall be among the wrongdoers there and then .
This ( method ) is closer to the mode of making people give their evidence true to facts , or they feel afraid that ( in the case of false testimony , ) following their oaths , ( equally solemn ) oaths will be turned ( towards nearer heirs ) . So fear Allah with perseverance and always listen ( to the Commandments of Allah attentively ) . And Allah does not guide the people who disobey and defy .
( Fear the Day ) when Allah will assemble all the Messengers and ask ( them ) : What response were you served ( by your respective Communities following your call for Din [ Religion ] ) ? They will ( submit their ) reply ( to their Lord ) : We have no knowledge . It is certainly You Who know all the unseen full well .
When Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , call to mind My Favour to you and your mother when I provided you strength through the Holy Spirit ( Gabriel ) ; you conversed with the people ( in a uniform style both ) from the cradle ( during early childhood ) and in the ripe age ( while preaching as a Messenger ) ; and when I taught you the Book , and wisdom ( and insight ) and the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) ; and when by My Command you made out of clay some ( figure ) looking like a bird , then you would breathe into it and by My Command it would become a bird ; and when you made the born blind and the leper ( i . e . victims of leprosy ) convalesce by My Command ; and when you raised up the dead ( standing , bringing them back to life from the grave ) by My Command ; and when I held back the Children of Israel from ( killing ) you while you brought them clear Sings , those who disbelieved among them said : This is nothing but sheer magic .
And when I imbued the hearts of the disciples with ( this ) : Believe in Me and My Messenger ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) , they said : We believe and bear witness that we are certainly Muslims .
And ( also recall ) when the disciples said : Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is it possible for your Lord to send down to us from heaven a table ( spread with food ) ? Isa ( Jesus ) said ( in reply ) : ( O people , ) fear Allah if you are illumined with faith .
They said : We seek ( only ) to eat of it so that our hearts are satiated and we know ( with added certitude ) that you have told us the Truth and we bear witness ( to the descent of the table ) .
Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said : O Allah , our Lord , send down to us from heaven the table spread ( with bounties ) so that ( the day of its descent ) becomes ( Id ) Festival Day for us , and for our predecessors ( as well as ) successors , and that ( spread table ) comes as a Sign from You , and provide us with sustenance , and You are the Best Sustainer .
Allah said : I certainly send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves ( after that ) I shall punish him with a torment such as I will never inflict on anyone else in all the worlds .
And when Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) ! Did you ask the people to take you and your mother as two gods besides Allah ? He will submit : Glory be to You ! It is not ( justified ) for me to say such a thing as I have no right to say . Had I said it You would surely have known it . You know every such ( thing ) that is in my heart , but I do not know those ( things ) which are in Your knowledge . It is only You indeed Who Know Well all that is unseen .
I said to them nothing except ( that ) which You ordered me to say : Worship ( only ) Allah Who is my Lord and your Lord ( too ) . And I kept a vigilant watch over ( their beliefs and actions ) so long as I was among them . But when You lifted me up then You alone watched over their ( affairs ) , and You are a Witness to everything .
If You torment them , they are only Your servants and if You forgive them , You are indeed Almighty , All - Wise .
Allah will say : This is the Day ( when ) the truth of the truthful will benefit them . There are Gardens for them with streams flowing beneath ; they shall live therein forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him . This ( pleasure of Allah ) is the highest achievement .
To Allah belongs the kingdom of all the heavens and the earth and whatever lies in them , and He wields full power over everything .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who created the heavens and the earth and produced darkness and light ; yet the disbelievers set up ( false gods as ) equals to their Lord .
( Allah ) is He Who created you from mud ( i . e . originated from it chemical genesis of human life on the planet Earth ) . Then He fixed a term ( for you to die ) . And with Him alone is the appointed time ( for holding the Day of Resurrection ) ; yet you doubt .
And He alone is Allah ( the True God to be worshipped ) in the heavens and the earth Who knows ( all ) your hidden and your open ( things ) . And He knows ( that too ) which you are earning .
And there comes to them no Sign of the Signs of their Lord but ( that ) they turn away from it .
Then indeed ( the same way ) they belied the Truth ( the Quran as well ) when it came to them ( as a Sign of Allah ) . But soon there is coming to them the news pertaining to what they have been making fun of .
Have they not seen how many a generation We eliminated before them whom We had given ( such an indomitable ) dominion ( and stronghold ) in the land as We have not given even to you ? And We sent upon them persistently falling rain and caused streams to flow beneath ( their dwellings and castles ) . Then , ( despite giving them such a luxurious life , ) We destroyed them because of their sins and raised other communities after them .
And had We revealed to you a book written on paper which these people could also have touched with their own hands , ( even ) then the disbelievers would have said : This is ( nothing ) but sheer magic .
And these ( disbelievers ) say : Why was an angel ( whom we could physically see and who would verify him ) not sent down to this ( Glorious Messenger ) ? Had We sent down an angel , ( their ) affair would have been settled once for all and they would not have been granted ( any ) respite .
And if We had made the Messenger an angel , even then We would have made him ( the form of ) a man , and ( even in that case , ) We would have put them in the same doubt which they are ( already ) in ( i . e . confused over his physical appearance , they would say : He is a human being like us . ) .
Indeed before you ( too ) the Messengers were laughed at , but then the same ( torment of the Truth ) which they ridiculed besieged those of them who ridiculed .
Say : Travel through the earth and see ( with a warned eye ) what has been the end of those who denied ( the Truth ) .
Ask ( them this question ) : To whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth ? And ( then ) proclaim ( this as well ) : Allahs it is . He has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . Those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls will not believe .
And to Him belongs ( all the creation ) that reposes at night and during the day . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : Shall I take ( for worship ) anyone as ( my ) friend other than Allah , Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth , and He feeds ( all ) and is not fed ( Himself ) ? Say : I have been commanded to become the first Muslim ( who bows his head before His Holy Presence ) and ( this too has been commanded , ) never to be one of the polytheists .
Say : Surely , I fear the Day of a mighty torment if I disobey my Lord . ( How is it possible ? )
He from whom that ( torment ) is averted that Day shall have been shown great Mercy ( by Allah ) . And it is this ( deliverance on the Last Day ) which is an evident success .
If Allah afflicts you with some suffering there is none who can remove it but He , and if He bestows some good upon you , then He wields full power over everything .
And He is the One Who is Dominant over His servants and He is All - Wise , All - Knowing .
Inquire ( of them ) : Who is the greatest to bear testimony ? Proclaim ( yourself ) : Allah is witness between you and me . This Holy Quran has been revealed to me so that with it I may warn you as well as every such person this ( Quran ) may reach . Do you really bear witness that there are ( also ) gods other than Allah ? Say : I do not bear witness ( to such a wrong thing ) . Reiterate : God is but He the Only One and I despise ( all ) these objects you associate ( with Allah ) .
Those to whom We have given the Book recognize this ( last of the Messengers ) as they recognize their sons . They are those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls , but they will not believe .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than one who invents a lie against Allah or who belies His Revelations ? Surely the wrongdoers shall not prosper .
And the Day when We shall assemble them all together and ask those who used to associate partners with Us : Where are your partners you assumed ( to be your gods ) ?
Then they will be left with no other excuse except that they ( will ) say : By Allah , our Lord , we did not associate partners with Allah .
See how they lie against their own selves and the blame they used to fabricate ( in the world ) has vanished from them !
And among them are ( also ) some who keep their ears towards you and ( in view of their evil intentions ) We have wrapped their hearts in veils . ( So , it is not possible for them now ) that they may understand it ( the Quran ) and ( We have ) plugged their ears . And even if they see all Signs ( naked ) , they ( still ) will not believe in them , so much so that when they approach you and quarrel with you the disbelievers say ( at that time ) : This ( Quran ) is nothing but fabricated stories of the old folk .
And they hinder ( others from following ) this ( Messenger and the Quran ) and ( also themselves ) flee far away from it . They ruin but their own souls and have no awareness ( of this destruction at all ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand ( on the verge of ) the Fire they will say : Would that we were sent back ( to the world ) , then we would not ( at all ) belie the Signs of our Lord and would be of the believers !
( This affirmation contains no truth . ) In fact whatever they used to hide before ( all that ) has become visible to them . And ( even ) if they were sent back ( to the world ) they would ( once again ) do the same that they had been forbidden . And undoubtedly they are ( seasoned ) liars .
And they will keep saying ( what they said before ) : There is no other ( life ) except the life of this world , nor shall we be raised up ( after death ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand before their Lord and Allah will say ( to them ) : Is not this ( life ) a truth ? They will submit : Yes , of course , by our Lord ( it is the Truth ) . Allah will ( then ) say : So ( now ) taste the torment because you used to disbelieve .
So those who belie their meeting with Allah incur loss , so much so that when the Last Hour comes upon them all of a sudden they will say : Oh , woe to us ! We committed a ( serious ) blunder with regard to ( believing in ) this ( Day of Resurrection ) . And they will be carrying the burdens ( of their sins ) on their backs . Beware ! Most evil is that burden which they are bearing .
( The luxury ) of the worldly life is nothing but play and funfair , and certainly it is the home of the Hereafter which is better for the Godfearing . Do you not understand ( this reality ) ?
( O Beloved ! ) We assuredly know that ( what ) they say grieves you . So they are not denying you but ( in fact ) it is the Revelations of Allah that the wrongdoers are denying .
And indeed ( many ) Messengers were rejected before you ( as well ) , but they remained steadfast facing this rejection and persecution until Our help reached them . And there is none that can alter the Words ( promises ) of Allah . And surely the accounts of the Messengers have come to you ( for peace of heart ) .
And if their disinclination and turning away is distressing you ( and you ardently desire them to believe in any case ) then , if possible , manage a tunnel , ( going down ) into the earth , or seek some ladder , ( climbing up ) to heaven , and bring them some ( exceptional ) Sign ( to show them , even then they will not believe ) . And if Allah so willed , He would indeed assemble them together on guidance . So ( owing to the overwhelming enthusiasm generating from your compassion , kindness and concern ) be not unaware ( of their ill fortune ) .
The truth is that they alone accept ( the invitation of Truth ) who listen to it ( with truthful hearts ) . And Allah will raise the dead ( the deniers of the truth from the graves as disbelievers ) . Then , they will be returned to the same ( Lord Whom they used to deny ) .
And they said : Why has a ( permanent ) Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : Allah assuredly has the power to send down ( such a ) Sign but most of them do not know ( the secrets of His wisdom ) .
And , ( O mankind ! ) there is no moving ( animal ) on the earth nor a bird that flies on its two wings but ( such ) that they are species like you [ umamun amthalu - kum in several traits ] . We have not omitted anything ( which is not given symbolic or elaborate details ) in the Book . Then all ( the people ) shall be gathered before their Lord .
Those who reject Our Revelations are deaf and dumb , ( groping ) in the folds of darkness . Allah holds astray whom He wills ( due to his stubbornness and the denial of the Truth ) , and puts whom He pleases on the straight road ( due to the acceptance of the Truth ) .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : Give your view : if Allahs torment befalls you or the Last Hour comes upon you , will you then call upon anyone other than Allah ( to escape the torment ? Reply ) if you are truthful .
( Nay , that is not possible at all . ) The truth is that it is ( Allah ) Whom you call upon ( even now ) . Then , if He wills He averts those ( hardships ) for which you call upon ( Him ) . ( At that time ) you forget those ( idols ) that you associate as partners ( with Allah ) .
Indeed We sent Messengers to many communities before you . Then We seized them with scarcity and distress ( due to their disobedience and defiance ) , so that they might beseech ( with submissiveness and humility ) .
Then why did they not humble themselves and wail and moan when Our torment came upon them ? But ( the fact is that ) their hearts became hardened and Satan made the ( sinful ) acts appear to them attractive and alluring that they used to perpetrate .
But when they forgot that Reminder which was urged upon them We opened up for them the gates ( to abundance ) of everything ( to take them to their end ) until when they luxuriated ( in ecstasy of sensual delights and sensuous gratification ) with all that was provided for them We seized them all of a sudden ( with torment ) and they were struck with despair .
So the root of the wrongdoing and unjust people was cut off . And all praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Say ( to them ) : What do you think if Allah deprives you of hearing and sight and seals up your hearts , ( then ) who is the god other than Allah who can restore to you these ( blessings afresh ) ? Look how diversely We explain Our Revelations . Yet they continue turning away .
( Also ) say ( to them ) : Tell me if the punishment of Allah comes upon you all of a sudden or openly , will ( any other ) be destroyed except those who do injustice ?
And We do not send Messengers but as Bearers of glad tidings and as Warners . So whoever believes and changes into a righteous person ( practically ) , they will have nothing to fear , nor will they grieve .
But those who belie Our Revelations , torment is bound to befall them because they used to disobey .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : I do not say to you that I possess the treasures of Allah , nor do I know the unseen myself , and nor do I say to you that I am an angel . I follow only that ( Commandment ) which is revealed to me . Say : Can the blind and the seeing be equal ? So do you not ponder ?
And warn by means of this ( Quran ) those who fear that they will be assembled before their Lord while they are without ( any ) helper or intercessor apart from Him so that they may become pious .
And do not turn away these ( run - down and broken - hearted ) people ( from your company and close circle ) who call upon their Lord persistently seeking only His pleasure morning and evening . There is nothing ( obligatory ) either on you from their account ( of deeds and rewards ) or upon them from your account . Even then if you turned them away ( from your munificence and benevolence ) , you would be of those who deprive others of their rights ( which does not go with your glory ) .
And in this way We put to test some of them by means of some others so that these ( affluent disbelievers seeing the poor Muslims ) say ( mocking ) : Are these the ones from amongst us upon whom Allah has bestowed His Favours ? Does Allah not know best the grateful ?
And when those who believe in Our Revelations come to you , then say ( affectionately ) : Peace be upon you . Your Lord has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . So whoever from amongst you commits some evil out of ignorance ( or suspension of discretion ) but later turns to ( Allah in ) repentance and amends ( himself ) , then surely He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And so do We elucidate in detail the Revelations ( and this is ) in order that the pattern of behaviour of the evildoers may become distinctly known ( to all ) .
Say : I am forbidden to worship those ( false gods ) that you worship apart from Allah . Say : I cannot follow your desires , for if I did I would certainly lose the right path . Nor shall I be one of the rightly guided ( which is impossible ) .
Say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Verily , I stand ( firm ) on the enlightening proof from my Lord and you treat it as false . I do not have that ( chastisement ) which you seek in haste . The command rests only with Allah . He relates the Truth and He is the Best Judge .
Say ( to them ) : Had I had that ( torment ) which you desire to have in haste then certainly the matter between me and you would have been settled once for all . And Allah knows the unjust full well .
With Him ( under His control and possession ) are the keys of the unseen ( i . e . the ways and means by which the unseen is disclosed to someone ) ; no one ( by ones own effort ) knows them but He . And He knows ( directly ) whatever is in the land and in the sea . And not a leaf falls but He knows it . There is not a grain in the folds of the earths darkness , nor anything green or dry but ( has been recorded ) in the enlightening Book .
And He is the One Who takes your souls by night and knows whatever you earn by day , and then wakes you up in the day , so that the appointed term ( of your life ) may be completed . Then to Him shall you return . Then ( on the Day of Reckoning ) He shall unfold to you ( all those actions ) which you used to do ( during this term of life ) .
And He has dominance over His servants and He sends to you ( angels as ) guardians until when death approaches anyone of you ( then the angels ) We send take his soul and they do not err ( or default ) .
Then they ( all ) will be returned to the Presence of Allah , their true Lord . Beware ! It is only His ( prerogative ) to decree . And He is the Quickest in taking the account .
Inquire of them : Who delivers you from the layers of the darkness of the land and the sea ? When ( in trouble , ) you supplicate Him totally prostrated and ( also ) in secret : If He delivers us from that ( adversity ) we shall surely be among the grateful .
Say : It is Allah Who rescues you from this ( adversity ) and every other distress . Yet you associate partners with Him .
Say : He has the power to send to you the torment ( may it be ) from above you or from underneath your feet , or engage you in strife by splitting you into sects and make you taste the violence of one against the other . See in what diverse ways We elucidate the Revelations , so that they may comprehend .
And your people have rejected this ( Quran ) as false whereas it is the Absolute Truth . Say : I am not a guardian over you .
Every news has a fixed time ( to occur ) and soon will you come to know .
When you see those who engage themselves in ( vain discourse and making a jest of ) Our Revelations keep away from them till they get busy with some other subject of conversation . But if Satan makes you forget ( it ) , then never ( ever ) sit with the unjust people after it strikes your mind .
And there is nothing ( obligatory ) upon the Godfearing from the account of these ( disbelievers ) , but they ( should ) admonish them so that they may be protected ( from disbelief and mocking the Quran ) .
And let them be forsaken who have made their own Din ( Religion ) a sport and pastime and who have been deceived by the worldly life . And continue to exhort them ( for their awareness ) by means of the ( Quran ) , so that no soul gets consigned to ruination as a result of its doings . ( Then ) will there be neither any helper nor any intercessor for him apart from Allah . And even if that ( soul ) atones ( for its sins ) full recompense ( i . e . ransom ) , that will not be accepted from it ( at all ) . It is they who are destroyed in consequence of their doings . For them is drinking of scalding water and a torturous torment because they used to reject faith .
Say : Should we worship besides Allah something that can neither bring us any profit nor do us any harm , and turn on our heels after Allah has blessed us with guidance , like the one satans have persuaded away from the right path into bewilderment in the land , whose companions are calling on him to the straight path : Come to us , ( but he can perceive nothing ) . Proclaim : The guidance of Allah is the only ( true ) guidance , and ( that is why ) we have been commanded to submit totally to the Lord of all the worlds .
And this ( has also been commanded : ) Establish Prayer and always fear Him , and Allah is He to Whom you ( all ) shall be gathered .
And He is the One ( Allah ) Who has created the heavens and the earth ( in accordance with the zero - defect strategy based ) on Truth . And the Day when He will say : Be , then that ( Day of Judgment ) will come into being . His Word is the Truth . His will be the Sovereignty on the Day when the Trumpet will be blown ( by Israfil ) . He ( is the One Who ) has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen , and He is All - Wise , All - Aware .
And call to mind when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said to his father Azar ( he was in fact his uncle ; he is called father according to the Arabic usage ) : Do you take the idols as gods ? Indeed I find you and your people ( engaged ) in manifest error .
And in the same way We showed Ibrahim ( Abraham ) all the kingdoms of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . the wonders of Our creation ) so that he might be one of those who possess the eye of certitude .
So when the night spread its darkness over him he beheld ( a ) star and said : Is this my Lord ( according to your view ) ? But when it set , he said ( communicating to his people ) : I do not like the setting ones .
Then when he saw the moon shining , he asked : Is this my Lord ( according to your view ) ? But when that ( also ) went down , he said ( communicating to his people ) : Had my Lord not guided me , I would surely have become ( like you ) one of those who go astray .
Then when he saw the sun shining , he said : Is it my Lord ( in your view because ) this is the biggest ? But when that ( too ) set , he exclaimed : O people ! I dissociate myself from ( all ) those ( objects ) that you associate ( with Allah ) as His partners .
I have indeed turned my face single - mindedly ( from all sides ) towards that ( Being ) Who has created the heavens and the earth beyond compare and ( beware : ) I am not from among the polytheists .
And his people started disputing and contending with him . ( Then ) he said : Do you dispute with me about Allah Who He has in fact guided me aright ? And I fear not these ( false gods ) that you associate with Him except that whatever ( harm ) my Lord may will ( He can do ) . My Lord has encompassed everything with ( His ) knowledge . So , do you not accept admonition ?
And how should I fear these ( false gods ) that you associate as partners ( with Allah ) while you do not fear that you have set up ( idols as ) peers to Allah ( whereas ) He has not sent down to you any authority ( to associate ? Now reply yourselves : ) Which of the two parties then has greater right to be free from the fear ( of chastisement ) if you have knowledge ?
Those who believe and do not mix up their belief with injustice ( of polytheism ) , it is they who are entitled to peace ( i . e . fearlessness in the Hereafter ) and it is they who are blessed with guidance .
And this was Our proof ( of the Oneness of Allah ) that We imparted to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) against a people ( hostile to him ) . We exalt to higher ranks whom We please . Surely your Lord is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And We bestowed upon him ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob son and grandson ) and blessed all ( of them ) with guidance . ( Also ) before ( them ) We provided guidance to Nuh ( Noah ) and ( guided aright ) among his progeny Dawud ( David ) , Sulaiman ( Solomon ) and Ayyub ( Job ) and Yusuf ( Joseph ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) . And thus do We reward the pious .
And ( We guided also ) Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) , Yahya ( John ) and Isa ( Jesus ) and Ilyas ( Elias ) . All these were the righteous people ( blessed with His nearness and divine consciousness ) .
And ( We guided ) Ismail ( Ishmael ) , al - Yasa ( Elisha ) and Yunus ( Jonah ) and Lut ( Lot , too ) . And We exalted all of them above all the people ( of their time ) .
And also of their ancestors and descendants and their brothers ( We honoured some with similar excellence ) and We chose them ( for Our special favour and eminence ) and guided them to the straight road .
This is the guidance of Allah whereby He guides those of His servants whom He wills . But , if ( supposedly ) they had associated partners with Allah , all their ( pious ) deeds that they performed would have been seized ( i . e . become void ) .
( It is ) they whom We gave the Book and the Authority of Judgement ( Sharia ) and Prophethood . Then if these people ( i . e . the disbelievers ) deny these things , We have indeed appointed such people ( to believe in these things ) who ( will ) never deny them .
It is ( these ) people ( i . e . the Messengers of Allah ) whom Allah has granted guidance . So , ( O Last of the Messengers , ) put into your practice all their ( exalted and superior ) ways and methods ( and assimilate them into your holy personage so that all the superior traits and sublime attributes of all the Messengers of Allah collect in you ) . Say : ( O people , ) I do not ask you for any wages ( for this provision of guidance ) ; it is but an admonition for mankind .
And they ( the Jews ) did not appreciate Allah with the just estimation that is His true measure ( when they denied the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) saying : Allah has not sent down anything to any human being . Say : Who sent down the Book which Musa ( Moses ) brought , a light and guidance for the people ? You have made them into separate paper - sheets showing it ( to the people ) and ( also ) concealing much ( of it ) . And you have been taught what neither you nor your forefathers knew . Say : ( All this is but the blessing of ) Allah . Then leave them ( in whatever plight they are ) sporting with their falsehood .
And this is ( that ) Book which We have sent down , the most blessed one . It ( authentically ) confirms those revealed Books that preceded it . And ( this ) has been ( sent down ) in order that ( firstly ) you warn the residents of the nucleus of all the ( human ) communities , Makka , and ( secondly ) the dwellers around it ( the world over ) . And only those who believe in it have faith in the Last Day , and they alone keep a vigilant watch over their Prayers .
And who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah ( and making a false claim of Prophethood ) says : Revelation has been sent down to me , whereas no revelation is sent to him ? ( And who can be more unjust than one who ( making a false claim of being a god ) says : I ( too ) shall soon send down such ( a Book ) as Allah has sent ? And if you visualize ( the sight ) when the unjust will be ( suffering from ) the throes of death and angels will stretch forth their hands ( towards them demanding : ) Deliver your souls from your bodies . This day you will be recompensed with humiliating torment because you used to speak falsehood against Allah and disobey and disregard His Revelations .
And verily ( on the Day of Resurrection ) you will come to Us all alone as We created you ( all alone ) the first time , and you will leave all that behind you which We have bestowed on you ( of wealth and children ) . And We will not see your intercessors accompanying you whom you have assumed to be Our partners in your affairs . Surely ( today ) your mutual relation ( and confidence ) has broken off and ( all ) the claims that you used to make have become void .
Verily Allah alone causes the seed - grain and the fruit - stone to burst forth and sprout . He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . Such is Allah ( the Glorious ) ; then where do you stray away ?
He is the One Who cleaves through the dark of the night and causes the ( light of ) the day to burst forth . And He is the One Who has made the night for rest and the sun and the moon for reckoning and computing . This is the appointed measure of the Almighty , the All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
And He is the One Who has made for you stars so that you may navigate through all kinds of darkness of the land and the sea . Indeed We have elucidated ( Our ) Revelations in detail for those who possess knowledge .
And ( Allah ) is He Who has created you from a single soul ( i . e . a single cell ) . Then ( for you ) there ( is ) a place of residing and a place of storage ( i . e . the mothers womb and the world or the world and the grave respectively ) . Surely We have explained the Signs ( of Our Power and Might ) in detail for the people who understand .
And He is the One Who sends down water from the sky . Then by means of this ( rain ) We bring forth vegetation of every kind out of which We produce green ( foliage ) from which We bring forth clustered grain packed one over the other , clusters of date - palm hanging low from its spathe and gardens of grapes , olives and ( also ) pomegranates ( which from many aspects look ) alike but ( in products , tastes and effects ) are unlike . Look at the fruit of the tree when it bears fruit , and ( also observe ) when it ripens . Verily in these are Signs for those who believe .
And these ( disbelievers ) associate jinn as partners with Allah , whereas He is the One Who has created them . And ( also ) without knowledge ( and reason ) they falsely attribute sons and daughters to Allah . Holy is He and Exalted far above ( all ) that they attribute ( to Him ) .
He is the One Who is the Originator of the heavens and the earth . How can He have children when He has no wife ? And He is the One Who has created everything and He has the best knowledge of everything .
That is ( Allah ) your Sustainer ; none has the right to be worshipped except He . ( He is ) the Creator of everything . So worship Him alone and He is the Protector of everything .
No vision can grasp His Sight but He has encompassed all vision and eyesight . He is the All - Penetrating Viewer , All - Aware .
The Signs ( of guidance ) have indeed come to you from your Lord . So he who perceives ( them by his insight ) brings ( benefit ) to his own self , and he who remains blind ( also ) brings loss upon his own self . And I am not a guardian over you .
And it is this way We elucidate ( Our ) Verses repeatedly ( diversifying the styles ) so that they ( the disbelievers ) may exclaim : You have studied ( from somewhere ) , and that We make it clear to the people who are prone to learn .
Follow this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord . There is no God except Allah , and turn away from those who associate partners with Allah .
And if Allah had willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) , these people would ( never ) have set up partners with Him . And We have ( also ) not made you a guardian over them , nor are you a protector over them .
And , ( O Muslims , ) do not abuse these ( false gods ) these ( polytheists ) worship besides Allah lest these people should ( also , in retaliation , ) revile against Allahs Glory wrongfully due to ignorance . Thus have We made the conduct of every sect ( and faction ) seem attractive to ( their own eyes and they regard only that as Truth ) . Then all have to return to their Lord , and He will inform them of ( the results of ) their deeds which they used to do .
They swear their most solemn oaths by Allah that if there comes to them some ( manifest ) Sign , they shall certainly believe in that . Say ( to them ) : Signs are but with Allah alone . And , ( O Muslims , ) how would you know that when the Sign comes ( still ) they will not believe ?
( Due to their own malice ) We shall turn their hearts and their eyes away from ( accepting the Truth the same way ) as they have disbelieved ( in the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) the first time . ( So , they will not believe even on seeing the Sign ) . And We shall leave them to wander astray in their rebellion and defiance .
And if We sent down to them angels , and the dead started talking to them , and We gathered everything in clusters ( before their eyes ) , even then they would not believe except what Allah willed , and most of them put ignorance to work .
And the same way We made for every Prophet enemiesthe satans from among men and jinnwho always pour into one anothers hearts ( flattery and ) gilded talk ( as suspicions ) in order to deceive . And if your Lord had willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) they would not have done so . So leave them and ( also ) the falsehood which they fabricate .
And ( its ) purpose is that the hearts of the people who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline to this ( deceit ) , and that they may develop fondness for it , and ( also ) that they may begin to do ( the evil deeds ) which they are themselves ( perpetrating ) .
( Say : ) Should I look for someone other than Allah as authority ( and judge ) while He ( Allah ) is the One Who has revealed to you the elaborate Book ( comprising a clear course of action ) . And those whom We gave the Book ( before ) know ( with conviction ) that this ( Quran ) has been revealed from your Lord ( based on ) Truth . So do not be of the sceptics ( with regard to these People of the Book whether they know or not that the Quran is a revealed Book ) .
And the Word of your Lord has been perfected in truthfulness and justice . There is no one who can change His Words . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if you obeyed what the majority of people ( dwelling ) on earth say , they would lead you astray from the path of Allah . They simply follow assumptions and speculations ( instead of truth and certitude ) and remain engaged in mere guesswork ( and telling lies ) .
Surely your Lord alone knows best the one who strays away from His path and only He knows best the rightly guided ( as well ) .
So always eat of that ( slaughtered animal ) over which the Name of Allah has been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ) if you believe in His Revelations .
And what is the matter with you that you do not eat of that ( meat ) over which the Name of Allah has been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ? You regard these lawful animals as unlawful without any reason ) , while He has spelled out to you in detail ( all ) those things which He has forbidden to you except when ( under the unavoidable circumstances ) you are forced ( to eat the bare necessity just as a life - saving measure . So do not declare more things forbidden on your own anymore ) . Surely many a people , devoid of ( concrete ) learning , lead astray ( others ) consistently by means of their own lusts ( and fantasies ) . And surely your Lord knows well the transgressors .
And give up all the sins of body and of heart ( i . e . both open and secret ) . Indeed those who are earning sins will soon be punished for ( the evil works ) that they used to perpetrate .
And do not eat of ( the meat of the animal ) over which the Name of Allah has not been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ) . Verily , it is a sin ( to eat that meat ) . And surely the devils keep pouring ( doubts ) into the hearts of their companions so that they may dispute with you . And if you follow their instructions , ( then ) you will also become polytheists .
Can he who was dead ( i . e . devoid of faith ) , then We gave him life ( by guidance ) and created for him the light ( of faith and gnosis ) , and ( now ) by means of that he walks among ( the rest of ) the people ( also to spread that light ) be like the one who is steeped in the darkness of ( ignorance and error in such a way ) that he can by no means come out of it ? Likewise , the actions disbelievers keep doing are made alluring and attractive ( in their sight ) .
And in like manner We made the lords ( and the affluent ) in every community the ringleaders of their crimes , so that they might execute frauds in that ( town ) and ( in fact ) they do not defraud anyone other than their own selves . And they are not aware ( of its evil outcome ) .
And when a Sign comes to them , they say : We shall never believe until we too are given ( a Sign ) like the one bestowed upon the Messengers of Allah . Allah knows best whom He is to assign the station of His Messengership . Soon the convicts will face humiliation before Allah and ( will undergo ) a severe torment as well because they used to defraud ( and deceive ) .
So he whom Allah intends to give guidance ( by way of bounty ) , He broadens his breast for Islam and he for whom He wills persistence in error ( which he has purchased ) He , ( by way of justice , ) tightens his breast with ( such a ) fierce constriction as if he were ascending up hard into the sky ( i . e . height ) . In the same way Allah sends torment ( of disgrace ) upon those who do not come to believe .
And this ( Islam ) is the ( only ) straight path of your Lord . Verily We have clearly explained Revelations in detail for those who accept direction and guidance .
For them is the home of peace and security with their Lord . And He is the One Who is their Protector because of the ( pious ) deeds which they used to do .
And on the Day when He gathers them all together ( He will say : ) O party of jinn ( satans ) , certainly you misguided many a human being , and their friends among mankind will say : O our Lord ! We have ( sufficiently ) benefited from each other , and ( in the same state of negligence and interest - mongering ) reached the end of the term that You had fixed for us ( but we could not make any preparation for this ) . Allah will say : ( Now ) the Fire is your abode in which you will reside forever , except what Allah may will . Verily your Lord is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
In this manner We continue making some of the oppressors dominate over others due to the ( evil ) deeds that they earn .
O community of jinn and men ! Did Messengers not come to you from among yourselves reciting My Verses to you and warning you of your appearance ( before Me ) this Day ? They will say : We bear witness against our own souls . The life of the world had caught them in deception and they will bear witness ( to this effect ) against themselves that ( in the world ) they were disbelievers ( i . e . the beliers of the Truth ) .
This ( sending of the Messengers ) was because your Lord would not destroy the towns due to injustice while the people living there were ( absolutely ) unaware ( of the teachings of the Truth i . e . no one made them acquainted with the Truth ) .
There are ranks ( determined ) for all according to their works , and your Lord is not unaware ( of the works ) they do .
And your Lord is Self - Sufficient , Lord of ( Great ) Mercy . If He wills He can eliminate you and , after you , make your successor whom He likes as He has raised you from the descendants of another people .
Indeed ( the torment ) which you are being promised has to certainly come and you cannot thwart ( Allah ) .
Say : O ( my ) people ! Keep working at your position and surely I continue working ( at my place ) . Then you shall soon come to know for whom it ends ( well ) in the Hereafter . Indeed the unjust will not be emancipated .
They have fixed for Allah a share of the same ( things ) that He has produced of crops and cattle . Then , out of their ( false ) speculation , they say : This share is for Allah and that for our ( so - called ) partners . Then ( the share ) meant for their partners does not reach Allah and that ( portion ) which is for Allah reaches their partners . What an evil judgment ( they ) are making !
And in like manner their partners have made killing of their children appear attractive to many of the idolaters in order to ruin them , and ( also ) make their ( leftover ) religion doubtful for them . And had Allah willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) they could not have done it . So leave them alone ( paying no heed to them ) and that which they fabricate .
And according to their ( heretic ) concept they ( also ) say : These ( particular ) cattle and crop are prohibited . None can eat them except the one whom we wish . ( And ) there are ( certain ) cattle whose backs are forbidden ( to ride ) . And there are ( some ) cattle on which these people do not pronounce the Name of Allah ( at the time of slaughter . All this ) amounts to fabrication against Allah . Soon He will punish them for ( that ) which they used to fabricate .
And they ( also ) say : The ( offspring ) in the wombs of these cattle is exclusively for our men but forbidden to our women and if that ( offspring ) is stillborn then they ( men and women ) all are partners in it . Soon He will punish them for their ( invented ) dogmas . He is indeed Most Wise , All - Knowing .
Certainly ruined are they who kill their children without ( true ) knowledge out of ( sheer ) foolishness , and make those ( things ) unlawful which Allah has bestowed upon them ( as sustenance ) , inventing a lie against Allah . They have certainly lost the straight path and could not be rightly guided .
And He is the One Who has produced trellised and untrellised gardens ( i . e . plants climbing up with supports and those not climbing up ) and ( also created ) date ( palms ) and vegetation with a wide variety of fruits and olive and pomegranates ( that ) resemble ( in shape ) but differ ( in taste ) . When ( these trees ) bear fruit , eat of their fruits and ( also ) give away its due ( as appointed by Allah ) on the day of harvest ( of the crop and the fruit ) and do not spend wastefully . Surely He does not like those who spend extravagantly .
And ( He ) has created ( giant - like ) cattle to carry burden and the ones lying - on - earth ( due to short height or for slaughter ) . Eat of this ( provision also by way of slaughter ) which Allah has provided for you . And do not follow in the footsteps of Satan ; certainly he is your open enemy .
( Allah ) has created eight pairs : two of the sheep ( male and female ) and two of the goat ( male and female ) . Say ( to them ) : Has He forbidden the two males or the two females or that ( offspring ) which is in the wombs of the two females ? Answer me on the basis of knowledge and reason if you are truthful ,
And two of the camel ( male and female ) and two of the cow ( male and female ) . Say ( to them ) : Has He forbidden the two males or the two females or that ( offspring ) which is in the wombs of the two females ? Were you present at the time when Allah pronounced to you this ( prohibitive ) injunction ? Then who can be more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah so that he may lead the people astray without knowledge ? Indeed Allah does not guide the unjust people .
Say : I do not find in that Revelation which has been sent to me anything forbidden to anyone who eats ( such things ) as he takes in food except carrion , or running blood , or the flesh of swine , for it is filthy and impious , or the sinfully slaughtered animal on which some name other than Allahs Name has been invoked at the time of slaughter . But he who becomes helpless ( due to hunger ) , and is neither disobeying nor transgressing , then surely your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And We forbade to the Jews every ( beast ) having claws , and We forbade them the fat of the cow and the goat , except that ( fat ) which coats their backs or lines their entrails , or which is attached to the bones . This We awarded them as a punishment for their rebellion . And assuredly We are Truthful .
Should they belie you then say : Your Lord is the Lord of Infinite Mercy , but His torment will not be averted from the evildoers .
Those who associate partners with Allah will soon say : Had Allah so willed , neither we nor our fathers would have committed polytheism ; nor would have we declared anything forbidden ( without authority ) . In like manner the people before them also belied until they tasted Our torment . Say : Do you have any ( authentic ) knowledge which you may bring forth for us ? ( If so , then present it ) . You ( abandoning knowledge of certitude ) follow only assumptions and speculations and tell sheer lies ( based on guesswork ) .
Say : Only Allahs is the irrefutable proof . So , if He had willed ( to force you ) He would have made all of you guidance - bound .
Say ( to these polytheists ) : Produce your witnesses who would ( come to ) testify that Allah has forbidden this . Then if at all they bear ( false ) witness , do not accept their testimony ( but instead , disclose to them their falsehood ) . Nor yield to the vain desires of those who refuse to accept Our Revelations as true and do not believe in the Hereafter and hold ( false gods as ) equal to their Lord .
Say : Come , I will recite to you those things which your Lord has forbidden to you : Do not set up anything as a partner with Him ; be morally excellent with parents ; and do not kill your children owing to poverty . We alone give you sustenance and ( will provide for ) them as well . And do not draw near to shameful deeds ( whether ) open or hidden . And do not kill the soul whose ( killing ) Allah has forbidden , except when it is rightful due ( according to Law in self - defence , against disruption and while combating terrorism ) . It is these ( injunctions ) He has enjoined upon you so that you may apply reason .
And do not go near the property of the orphan but in the most likable manner until he reaches the age of maturity . And always give full measure and weight with justice . We do not burden any soul beyond its ability to bear it . And when you say ( something pertaining to somebody ) , do justice even though he is ( your ) near relative . And always fulfil the promise of Allah . These are ( the matters ) which He has strictly ordained for you in order that you may accept direction and guidance .
And that this ( Islamic Law ) is My straight path . So follow it and do not follow ( other ) paths , because they ( i . e . the other paths ) will move you away from Allahs path . This is what He has enjoined you strictly so that you may become Godfearing .
Then We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book to complete ( the Favour ) on him who would become pious , and ( revealed it ) as explanation of everything and as guidance and mercy , so that they might believe in meeting with their Lord ( on the Day of Resurrection ) .
And this ( Quran ) is a Book which We have revealed full of blessings . So ( now ) follow it and fear ( Allah ) persistently so that you are shown Mercy .
( The Quran has been revealed lest ) you ( should ) say : The ( heavenly ) Book was sent down before us only to the two communities ( the Jews and the Christians ) , and undoubtedly we were unaware of their reading and teaching .
Or ( lest ) you should say : Had the Book been sent down to us we would certainly have been better guided than they are . So , now has come to you from your Lord the clear proof and guidance and mercy . Then who can be more unjust than he who treats the Revelations of Allah as lies and evades them ? Soon shall We inflict an evil torment upon those who evade Our Revelations because they used to turn away ( from the Signs of Allah ) .
They are just waiting for the angels ( of torment ) to reach them , or your Lord to come ( Himself ) , or some ( exclusive ) Signs of your Lord to come ( perceptibly . Tell them : ) The Day when some Signs of your Lord will come ( in such an evident way , then accepting ) the belief will not benefit someone who had not believed before , or did not earn any good ( in the state of ) having believed . Say : Wait ; we ( too ) are waiting .
Surely those who have broken up their religion ( by introducing segregated paths ) and have divided into ( different ) sects , you are not ( concerned with or responsible for ) them in any matter . Their case is only with Allah . Then He would let them know what they used to do .
Whoever brings one good deed will have to his credit ( as a reward ) ten more like it , and whoever brings an evil deed will not be punished for more than one similar ( evil deed ) . And no injustice will be done to them .
Say : Verily my Lord has guided me to the straight path . ( This is the path of ) the well - founded Din ( Religion ) , the path followed by Ibrahim ( Abraham ) single - mindedly devoted to Allah , turning aside from every falsehood . And he was not of the polytheists .
Say : My Prayer , my Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) and sacrifice ( together with the entire worship and servitude ) and my life and my death are for Allah alone , Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
He has no partner and of this have I been commanded and I am the first Muslim ( in the entire creation ) .
Say : Should I look for a Lord other than Allah while He is the Sustainer of everything ? And whatever ( sin ) each soul earns ( its evil outcome ) falls back upon it . And no bearer of burden will bear anothers burden . Then you are to return to your Lord alone , and He will inform you ( of the truth of the matters ) wherein you used to differ .
And He is the One Who has made you vicegerents in the earth and exalted some of you over others in ranks , so that He may test you by means of ( things ) which He has bestowed upon you ( as a trust ) . Surely your Lord is swift in awarding punishment ( to those who deserve it ) , but He is indeed Most Forgiving and Ever - Merciful ( towards the aspirants to forgiveness ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim , Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) This is the Book ( that ) has been revealed to you . So , let there be no feeling of constriction in your ( illumined ) breast ( on thinking of the disbelievers belying and denying the promulgation of its message . This has been revealed with the sole purpose ) that by means of it you may warn ( the ones who deny ) , and it ( provides ) direction and guidance to the believers .
( O people ! ) Follow this ( Quran ) which has been sent down to you from your Lord , and do not follow ( any heretic rulers and ) friends other than Him . You take advice but little !
And how many a town ( is such as ) We destroyed ! Our torment came upon them either at night or ( while ) they were asleep at noon .
And when Our torment came upon them , their cry was nothing ( else ) but they began to say : No doubt we were the wrongdoers .
Then We shall certainly interrogate those towards whom We sent Messengers , and We shall assuredly ask the Messengers as well ( with regard to the response of their call for Truth and their teaching and preaching ) .
We shall then relate to them from ( Our ) knowledge ( all their ) affairs , and We were not absent ( from anywhere , unable somehow to monitor them ) .
And on that Day the weighing ( of deeds ) is a truth . So those whose scales ( of righteous deeds ) are heavy will be successful .
But those whose scales ( of righteous deeds ) are light , it is they who have harmed their souls because they had been unjust to Our Revelations .
And surely We established you firmly on earth with control and authority and created therein means of sustenance for you . Yet you thank but little .
And certainly We did create you ( i . e . your real being ) , then gave you shape ( i . e . accomplished the phases of chemical and biological genesis and evolution of life till the completion of the physical existence of Adam ) . Then We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam . They all prostrated themselves except Iblis ; he was not of those who prostrate themselves .
( Allah ) said : ( O Iblis ) ! What inhibited you that you did not prostrate yourself when I commanded you ? He said : I am better than he . You have created me from fire and You have made him from clay .
( Allah ) said : So , get you down from here . You have no way any right to show arrogance here . Away with you ( from My Presence ) ! You are certainly of the disgraced and humiliated lot .
He ( Iblis ) said : Grant me respite ( to live ) till the Day when people will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
( Allah ) said : Indeed You are of the respited .
He ( Iblis ) said : Since You have led me astray , ( I swear that ) I will ( also ) sit on Your straight path ( to waylay the children of Adam till I cause them to deviate from the path of Truth ) .
I will assuredly approach them from their front , from their rear , from their right and from their left and ( consequently ) You will not find most of them grateful .
Allah commanded : ( O Iblis ! ) Be gone from here , humiliated and cursed . Whoever of them will follow you I will certainly fill Hell with all of you .
And , O Adam , reside you and your wife ( both ) in Paradise and eat from wherever you wish . And ( beware ! ) Do not go near this tree lest you become of those who transgress .
But Satan created doubt in the hearts of both ( Adam and Hawwa [ Eve ] ) in order to make manifest to them their private parts which were hidden ( from their eyes ) . He said : ( O Adam and Hawwa [ Eve ] , ) your Lord has not forbidden you ( eating fruit of ) this tree but ( because , eating it , ) you both should transform into angels ( free from human characteristics ) or both of you become ( its ) permanent residents ( i . e . never will you be deprived of this station of proximity ) .
And he swore to both of them , saying : I am indeed of your well - wishers .
So by means of deceit he tempted both of them down ( into eating the fruit of the tree ) . When both had tasted ( the fruit of ) the tree , their private parts became manifest to them and they started sticking the leaves of Paradise to their ( bodies ) . Then their Lord called out to them : Did I not forbid both of you ( to get closer to ) that tree and did I ( not ) say to you that Satan was indeed an open enemy of you both ?
Both of them submitted : O our Lord ! We have wronged our souls . And if You do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be among the losers .
( Allah ) said : Go down ( all of you and live in the earth ) ; some of you are enemies of others . A residence and means of living ( have been determined ) for you in the earth for a fixed term ( i . e . you are sent down with two basic rights of dwelling and subsistence in the earth ; so , organize and stabilize the system of your life on that ) .
( Allah ) said : You will spend your life in the very same earth , and will die in it and from the same will you be brought forth ( on the Day of Resurrection ) .
O mankind ! Surely We have sent down for you ( such a ) clothing that hides your private parts and adds ( to your ) aesthetic value . And ( in addition to your outward clothes We have also provided you an inward dress as well and that is ) the dress of Allahs fear ( which ) is the best . ( All these inner and outer attires ) are the Signs of Allah so that they may take advice .
O mankind ! ( Beware ! ) Let not Satan put you to the test , as he ousted your parents from Paradise , stripping them of their dress so as to unveil to them their private parts . Indeed he ( himself ) and his clan keep watching you ( from such positions where ) you cannot catch sight of them . Verily We have made the satans friends of those who do not believe .
And when they commit some indecency they say : We found our ancestors on the same ( way ) and Allah has enjoined the same upon us . Say : Allah does not enjoin acts of indecency . Do you say about ( the Essence of ) Allah such things as you do not know ( even ) yourselves ?
Say : My Lord has enjoined justice . And set your direction aright ( towards the Kaba ) on every occasion and place of prostration . And worship Him devoting your obedience sincerely to Him alone . As He has originated your ( creation and life ) so will you return ( towards Him ) .
He guided one group but error was proved on the other ( consequent on their own doings ) . Indeed they made friends with satans leaving Allah aside and think that they are the rightly guided .
O Children of Adam ! Dress up decently every time you offer Prayer . And eat and drink but do not spend extravagantly because certainly He does not like the extravagant .
Say : Who has forbidden the adornment ( and beautification ) of Allah that He has produced for His servants and ( who has forbidden also ) the pure and clean food ? Say : ( All these bounties ) that are ( available generally ) for the believers in the life of this world will be exclusively ( for them ) on the Day of Resurrection . This way We elucidate Our Revelations for those who have knowledge .
Say : My Lord has declared unlawful only ( all ) the indecent acts which become known and which remain hidden and sins and unjust excesses , and that you associate with Allah that for which He has not sent down any authority , and ( in addition ) saying such things about ( the Essence of ) Allah as you do not know yourselves .
And a term ( has been appointed ) for every people and when their ( fixed ) hour approaches they can neither hold back nor advance ( even ) for a single moment .
O Children of Adam ! If Messengers come to you from among yourselves who relate to you My Revelations , then whoever becomes Godfearing and pious and amends ( himself ) , neither will any fear obsess them nor will they grieve .
But those who belie Our Revelations and turn away from ( believing in ) them in defiance , it is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents .
Then who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah or rejects His Revelations as false ? ( That ) share of such people will reach them ( as ) has been written in the Book , until when the ( angels ) whom We send will come to them to take away their souls they will say ( to them ) : Now where are those ( false gods ) whom you used to worship besides Allah ? They will say ( replying ) : They are lost from us ( i . e . how can they be seen now ! ) , and they will bear witness ( themselves ) against their own souls that they were doubtlessly disbelievers .
Allah will say : Enter into the Fire , joining those ( Hellish ) groups of jinn and men who have passed before you . Whenever a party will enter ( Hell ) , it will curse its sister party until , when all ( groups ) will forgather , their successors will say in respect of their predecessors : O our Lord , these are the people who led us astray , so increase their torment of Hell two times . He will say : It is double for everyone but you know it not .
And their predecessors will say to their successors : You have not gained any superiority over us , so you ( too ) taste the torment ( now ) for what you used to earn .
Indeed those who reject Our Revelations as false and rebel against them , the gates of the heavens ( of Mercy and Acceptance ) shall not be opened to them , nor will they be able to enter Paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle ( i . e . their entrance into Paradise will be impossible the same way ) . And it is like that We punish the evildoers .
The ( Fire of ) Hell will be their mattress as well as a covering over them , and We torment the wrongdoers the same way .
But those who believe and do good works persistently , We do not burden anyone beyond his endurance ; it is they who are the people of Paradise ; they will live in it forever .
And We shall remove from their breasts ( rancour and ) spite ( that they had for others in the world ) . Streams will flow under ( their palaces ) and they will say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has brought us here . Had Allah not guided us , we would never have made our way through ( to this station ) . Verily , the Messengers of our Lord brought us ( the message of ) Truth . It will be called out ( that Day ) : You have been made heirs to this Paradise for the ( pious ) deeds that you used to do .
And the people of Paradise will call out to the inmates of Hell : We have really found true the promise that our Lord made to us . Have you ( also ) found true what your Lord promised ( you ) ? They will answer : Yes . Thereupon a herald will call out among them : The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers .
( It is they ) who used to hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah and look for crookedness in it and they disbelieved in the Hereafter .
And between both ( of them i . e . the inmates of Paradise and Hell ) there is a barrier ( ramparts or heights ) , and on the Araf ( the ramparts ) there will be men who will recognize all by their features . And they will call out to the people of Paradise : Peace be upon you . They ( the people of the Araf [ the Heights ] ) will not have entered Paradise ( themselves as yet ) but will be aspiring ( to that ) .
And when their eyes will be turned towards the inmates of Hell , they will say : O our Lord , ( join ) us not ( together ) with the unjust people .
And the people of the Araf ( the Heights ) will call out to those people ( of Hell ) whom they will be recognizing by their identification marks saying ( to them ) : Your parties could not be of any use for you , nor ( could rescue you ) your arrogance that you used to practise .
Is it they about whom you used to swear ( on seeing their miserable plight ) : Allah will ( never ) bless them with His Mercy ? ( But listen ! It is they who are now being called : ) Enter Paradise ; you will neither fear nor grieve .
And the inmates of Hell will call out to the inhabitants of Paradise : Bless us with some water ( of Paradise ) or of ( the provision ) that Allah has granted you . They will say : Allah has indeed forbidden both ( these bounties ) to the disbelievers .
Those that made their Din ( Religion ) a funfair and sport and whom the worldly life had deceived . We shall forget them Today as they forgot their meeting of this Day ( with Us ) and as they used to deny Our Revelations .
And surely We have brought them such a Book ( the Quran ) which We have elucidated ( i . e . made clear ) on ( the basis of Our ) knowledge , a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
They are just waiting for the outcome of that ( stated matter ) . The Day when the outcome of that ( matter ) will be unfolded , the people who had forgotten it before this will say : No doubt the Messengers of our Lord came with the Truth . So , are there any intercessors ( Today ) who will intercede for us ? Or , could we be returned ( to the world again ) so that ( this time ) we might do deeds different from ( those ) that we had been perpetrating ( before ) ? They certainly harmed themselves , and that ( lie and fabrication ) which they used to invent has parted with them .
Indeed Allah is your Lord , Who created the heavens and the earth in six aeons ( six phases ) , and then ( matching His Glory ) ascended to His Throne ( i . e . enforced in the universe the system of His Sovereign Command and Control ) . He wraps up the day with the night ( under the arrangement that the day and the night ) keep chasing one another swiftly . And the sun and the moon and the stars ( all ) have been subjected to ( a system ) under His Command . Beware ! He is the One Who runs the system of Creating ( everything ) , Planning , Command and Control . Blessed is Allah Who gradually and progressively sustains and nourishes all the worlds .
Invoke your Lord ( both ) most submissively and on the queit . Surely He does not like the transgressors .
And do not cause disruption and mischief in the land after it has been set in order ( i . e . after reformation of living conditions in the country ) . And keep supplicating Him fearing ( His torment ) and aspiring ( to His Mercy ) . Assuredly Allahs Mercy is near to those who are ( spiritually excellent , ) committed to doing pious works .
And He is the One Who sends the winds as glad tidings before His Mercy ( rain ) until when these ( winds ) bring moisture - laden heavy clouds , We drive these ( clouds ) towards a town dead ( of drought and infertility ) . Then We cause downpour from ( the clouds ) , and by means of this ( water ) We bring forth fruits of all kinds ( from the earth ) . In like manner We shall bring forth the dead ( from the graves on the Day of Resurrection ) , so that you may take direction and guidance .
And the soil which is productive ( i . e . fertile ) yields vegetation ( plentifully ) by the Command of Allah , but ( the soil ) which is sterile brings forth nothing but scanty rubbish . In the same way We repeatedly elucidate ( Our ) Revelations ( Proofs and Signs ) for the people who are grateful .
Indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . So he said : O my people ! Worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Verily I fear for you the torment of a dreadful Day .
The chiefs and the affluent of his people said : ( O Nuh - Noah , ) surely we find you ( caught ) in an open error .
He said : O my people , there is not any error in me but ( the truth is that ) I am ( raised as ) a Messenger by the Lord of all the worlds .
I communicate to you the messages of my Lord and exhort you , and I know from Allah that which you do not know .
Do you wonder that direction and guidance from your Lord has come ( on the tongue ) of a man from among yourselves so that he may warn you ( of the chastisement of Allah ) , and that you become Godfearing , and the purpose is that Mercy may be shown to you ?
Then they belied him . So We delivered him and those who were with him in the Ark and We drowned all those who rejected Our Revelations as false . They were indeed a blind people ( with no insight ) .
And to ( the people of ) Ad We ( sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Hud . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Will you not become Godfearing ?
The chiefs and the affluent of his people who disbelieved ( i . e . resisted and opposed the call for Truth ) said : ( O Hud , ) we really find you ( steeped ) in foolishness and we think you are surely one of the liars .
He said : O my people , there is no foolishness about me but ( the truth is that ) I am ( raised as ) a Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds .
I am communicating to you the messages of my Lord and I am your trustworthy well - wisher .
Do you wonder that direction and guidance from your Lord has come ( on the tongue ) of a man from among yourselves so that he may warn you ( of the chastisement of Allah ) ? And call to mind when He made you the successors ( in the land ) after the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and in raising you amply augmented your power ( might and stature ) . So remember the Favours of Allah so that you may prosper .
They said : Have you come to us ( that ) we may worship only One God , Allah , and forsake ( all those gods ) whom our ancestors used to worship ? So bring upon us that ( torment ) you have warned us of if you are of the truthful .
He said : Certainly the torment and wrath upon you from your Lord has become inevitable . Do you dispute with me over the names ( of those idols ) which you ( yourselves ) and your ancestors have ( supposedly ) named and for which Allah has not sent down any authority ? So wait ( for the torment ) ; I am ( also ) with you among those who wait .
Then We emancipated him and those who were on his side by Our Mercy and cut the roots of those who denied Our Revelations . And they were those who would never have believed .
And to ( the people of ) Thamud We ( sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Salih . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Indeed there has come to you from your Lord a clear Sign . This she - camel of Allah is a Sign for you . So leave her ( free ) to graze in Allahs earth and do not touch her with an evil ( intention ) or a grievous torment will seize you .
And remember when He made you successors ( in the land ) after ( the people of ) Ad and granted you settlement in the land . You build castles in the soft ( plain ) areas and carve out mountains to chisel dwellings ( out of them ) . So remember ( these ) Favours of Allah and do not cause disruption and mischief in the land .
The arrogant and rebellious chiefs and the rich of his people asked the poor and the down - trodden who had accepted faith : Are you sure that Salih has been really sent from his Lord ( as His Messenger ) ? They said : We surely believe in whatever he has been sent with .
The arrogant said : No doubt we strongly deny ( that ) which you have believed in .
So they killed the she - camel ( by hamstringing ) and rebelled against the command of their Lord and said : O Salih ! Bring upon us that ( torment ) you have threatened us with if you are ( truly ) from among the Messengers .
So ( the torment of ) a high - scale earthquake seized them and in the morning they lay ( dead ) in their homes with faces down upon the ground .
Then ( Salih ) turned away from them , saying : O my people , verily I delivered to you the message of my Lord and gave you advice ( as well ) but you do not like the counsellors .
And ( likewise We sent ) Lut ( [ Lot ] as well ) when he said to his people : Do you perpetrate ( such ) lasciviousness as no people in the world have attempted before you ?
Verily you go after men for your lust leaving the women ; you are in truth given to transgression .
And his people had no reply except that they said : Drive them out of the town ; indeed they seek extreme purity !
So We delivered him ( Lut [ Lot ] ) and his family except his wife ; she was one of those who stay on in torment .
And We rained on them ( stones ) . See then what the end of the evildoers was !
And towards Madyan ( We sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no God except He . Indeed there has come to you from your Lord a clear sign . So give full measure and weight and do not decrease while giving people their things , nor create mischief in the land after reformation ( of the living conditions ) . This is better for you if you believe ( in the Divine Message ) .
And do not sit on every path to frighten everyone who has embraced faith in this ( Call ) and to hinder ( him ) from the path of Allah and to look for any crookedness in this ( Message to make him feel frustrated and disgusted with the true Din [ Religion ] ) . And remember ( Allahs favour ) when you were small in number and He multiplied you , and see what was the end of those who spread mischief and cause disruption !
And if a party among you have believed in that ( Din [ Religion ] ) which I have been sent with and some other party have not believed in it , then , ( O Believers , ) have patience till Allah judges between us and He is the Best of judges .
The rebellious and arrogant chiefs and the capitalists of his people said : O Shuaib , we shall in any case drive you out of our town and those who , in your company , have embraced faith or else you shall have to return to our religion . Shuaib said : Even though we despise ( to return to your religion ) ?
Indeed we would invent a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion after Allah has saved us from it . And it is not at all ( appropriate ) for us to return to that ( religion ) unless Allah , our Lord , so wills . As for His knowledge , our Lord encompasses everything ; we have put our trust in Allah alone . O our Lord , judge between us and our ( hostile ) people with Truth and You are the Best of judges .
And the chiefs and capitalists of his people , who had disbelieved ( and denied the Truth ) , said : O people , if you follow Shuaib then you will surely be the losers .
Then a ( torment of ) high - scale earthquake seized them and in the morning they were dead lying prone in their homes .
Those who belied Shuaib were ( annihilated ) , as if they had ( never ) lived in that ( town ) . Those who belied Shuaib , it was ( in fact ) they who became the losers .
Then ( Shuaib ) separated from them and said : O my people , verily , I communicated to you the Messages of my Lord and I admonished you ( as well ) . Then why should I regret ( the devastation of ) a disbelieving people ?
And never did We send a Messenger to any land but that We seized its inhabitants with hardship , scarcity , adversity and suffering ( due to belying and defying the Messenger ) so that they might moan and go humble .
We then changed ( their ) misfortune with good fortune till they made ( an all - embracing ) progress . But ( out of ingratitude ) they said : Our ancestors too have been living through pain and pleasure ( the same way ) . So We caught them unawares on this ingratitude and they did not even notice ( it ) .
But if the inhabitants of ( these ) towns had embraced faith and adopted Godwariness We would have opened to them blessings from the heavens and the earth . But they rejected ( the Truth ) . So We seized them with ( torment ) for the ( impious acts ) they used to perpetrate .
Have the residents of the towns now become free of this fear that Our torment may seize them ( again ) at night when they are ( fast ) asleep ( in carefree slumber ) ?
Or are the residents of the towns free of this fear that Our torment may seize them ( again ) in the forenoon when they are at play ( completely lost in the worldly pleasures ) ?
Are they fearless of Allahs secret plan ? So , no one feels fearless against the secret plan of Allah except the people who run into loss .
Does ( this also ) not guide and ( enlighten ) those who have inherited the earth ( themselves ) after ( the destruction of ) those ( one time ) dwelling in the earth that if We desire We may punish them ( as well ) for their sins and We shall seal their hearts ( due to their evil behaviour ) so they will be unable to hear ( and understand the Truth ) .
These are the towns whose news We are narrating to you . Surely their Messengers came to them with Clear Signs . But ( even then ) they remained inert to believe in what they had rejected before . That is how Allah seals up the hearts of the disbelievers .
And We did not find ( the fulfilment of ) commitment in most of them and We found most of them but disobedient .
Then after them We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and the nobles of his ( court ) , but they did injustice to ( these Proofs and Miracles ) . See , then , what was the end of those who spread mischief and strife !
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O Pharaoh ! Indeed I am ( raised as ) a Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds .
What behooves me is to say ( nothing ) about Allah but the Truth . I have indeed brought you a Clear Sign from your Lord . So send away with me the Children of Israel ( setting them free of your yoke of slavery ) .
He ( Pharaoh ) said : If you have brought a Sign then bring it ( to the fore ) if you are truthful .
So Musa ( Moses ) put his staff ( down ) , and at once it changed into a veritable serpent .
And he drew out his hand ( after putting it into his collar opening ) and that ( too ) at once became ( radiant ) white to the viewers .
The chiefs of Pharaohs people said : He is for sure ( some ) expert magician .
( O people ! ) He seeks to drive you out of your land . So , what do you advise ?
They said : Put ( the matter ) of Musa ( Moses ) and his brother off ( for a while ) and send out heralds to ( different ) cities to summon ( magicians ) .
They would bring you every skilful sorcerer .
And the magicians came to Pharaoh and said : There should certainly be some reward for us if we overmaster .
Pharaoh said : Yes , of course ; ( what to talk of a simple reward , in that case ) you will be among the privileged ones ( of my court ) .
( The magicians ) said : Musa ( Moses ) ! Either you throw ( your object ) or we become ( the first ) to throw .
Musa ( Moses ) said : You throw ( first ) . So when they threw ( their strings and sticks on the ground ) they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with awe , and brought ( forth ) an extremely effective magic .
And We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : ( Now ) throw your staff ( on the ground ) . Then at once it began swallowing up what they had fabricated through deception .
So , the Truth was established , and everything that they had been doing was proved false .
So , they ( the representatives of Pharaoh ) were vanquished on the spot and backed away humiliated .
And ( all ) the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
They exclaimed : We believe in the ( real ) Sustainer of all the worlds .
( The ) Lord of Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) .
Pharaoh said : ( Have ) you believed in Him even before I permitted you ? This is indeed a plot which you ( all ) have hatched ( against me ) in this city in order that you may expatriate from this ( country ) its ( Coptic ) inhabitants . So you will know ( its consequences ) very soon .
Surely , I shall cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides and then , most certainly , I shall crucify all of you .
They said : Verily , we are to return to our Lord .
And which of our acts has annoyed you ? Just that we have believed in the ( true ) Signs of our Lord when they reached us . O our Lord ! Gush on us torrents of patience and lift us ( from the world ) as ( steadfast ) Muslims .
And the chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said ( to Pharaoh ) : Will you leave Musa ( Moses ) and his ( revolutionary ) people to launch strife in the country ? And ( then ) will they spare you and your gods ? He said : ( No , ) we shall now kill their sons ( to exhaust their male numerical strength ) and let their women live ( so that they may be wronged ) . And surely we hold sway over them .
Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Seek help from Allah and be steadfast ; surely the earth belongs to Allah . He makes its inheritors whom He likes of His servants . And it ends well for the Godfearing alone .
They said : ( O Musa ( Moses ) [ Moses ] ! ) We were persecuted before you came to us and after your arrival as well . ( We have suffered both ways . When will our misery end ? ) Musa ( [ Moses ] appeasing his people ) said : Your Lord would soon destroy your enemy and ( then ) make you the successors ( to the governance ) in the land and He will then monitor how you perform ( after coming into power ) .
Then We seized the people of Pharaoh with ( the torment of ) some years ( of famine ) and scarce yield of fruits so that they might be admonished .
But whenever relief reached them , they would say : This is owing to us . And when adversity befell them , they would ascribe it as an ill - omen to Musa ( Moses ) and his companions ( of faith ) . Beware ! Their omen ( i . e . the evil outcome of their doings ) lies with Allah alone . But most of them do not know .
And they ( the people of Pharaoh ) said ( arrogantly ) : ( O Musa [ Moses ] ! ) Whatever Sign you bring us to cast a spell upon us , we are not prone to believe in you .
Then We sent upon them ( many ) distinct signs ( as chastisement ) : storms , locusts , lice , frogs and blood . ( Even ) then they continued with arrogance and rebellion and they were an ( extremely ) sinful people .
And when ( some ) torment befell them , they would say : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Pray for us to your Lord by means of ( His ) promise with you . If you avert this torment from us , we will surely believe in you and will send with you the Children of Israel ( setting them free ) .
But when We would remove from them the torment for the appointed term which they nearly completed , they would at once break their promise .
Then ultimately We took retribution from them ( for all their disobedience and breach of promises ) and drowned them in the river because they ( successively ) belied Our Revelations and were ( absolutely ) neglectful of them .
And We made the people ( i . e . the Children of Israel ) who were powerless and oppressed the inheritors of the east and the west of the land ( Egypt and Syria ) wherein We had placed blessing . And ( in this way ) a fair promise of your Lord with the Children of Israel was fulfilled because they remained steadfast ( in the face of Pharaohs tyranny and oppression ) . And We destroyed ( those magnificent castles ) which Pharaoh and his people had built , and those towers ( and the gardens ) too which they used to raise high .
And We brought the Children of Israel across the ( Mediterranean ) Sea where they came upon a people who were squatting around their idols ( for worship ) in deep devotion . They ( the Children of Israel ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Make for us too a god like the ones they have . Musa ( Moses ) said : You are surely a very ignorant people .
Verily that whose ( worship ) they are ( tangled in ) is destined to ruin and whatever they are doing is ( utter ) heresy .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Should I seek for you a god other than Allah while He ( Allah ) is the One Who has granted you superiority over all the worlds ?
And remember ( the time ) when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who used to afflict you with fierce torment . They used to slay your boys and spare your girls alive . And in that there was a great trial for you from your Lord .
And We promised Musa ( Moses ) thirty nights and We made it good by adding to it ( another ) ten ( nights ) . So the term ( appointed ) by his Lord was completed in forty nights . And Musa ( Moses ) said to his brother Harun ( Aaron ) : ( In the meanwhile , ) officiate at my seat among my people and continue to do ( their ) reformation , and follow not the way of those who create mischief ( i . e . prevent them from treading this path ) .
And when Musa ( Moses ) came at the time ( set ) by Us and his Lord spoke to him he ( ardently aspired to behold Him out of the pleasure of hearing Allahs Word and Voice and ) submitted : O Lord , show me ( Your Beauty ) so that I may savour Your Sight . Allah said : By no means can you look upon Me ( directly ) but look towards the mountain . So if it stays firm in its place then soon will you behold My Beauty . When his Lord unveiled the Light ( of His Divine Beauty ) on to the mountain , ( He ) crushed it into sand particles ( with the intense Divine Radiance ) and Musa ( Moses ) fell down unconscious . Then when he recovered , he submitted : Holy You are and I turn to You in repentance and I am the first of those who believe .
( Allah ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! I have exalted you and chosen you above all the people by My Messages and My conversation . So hold fast to whatever I have bestowed upon you and be among the grateful .
And We ( have ) inscribed for him on the Tablets ( of the Torah ) instructions for every matter and detail of everything . Hold it with firmness and enjoin your people ( as well ) to adopt its best things . Soon shall I show you the abode of the disobedient .
I shall keep those from ( comprehending and accepting ) My Revelations who are unjustly arrogant in the land . And ( even ) if they see all Signs they shall not believe in them and ( even ) if they find the path of guidance they shall not adopt it as ( their ) way but if they perceive the wrong path , they will embrace it as their way . It is because they denied Our Revelations and remained negligent of them .
And those who belie Our Revelations and the meeting of the Last Day , their actions become void . What will they be rewarded except what they have been doing ?
And after Musa ( [ Moses ] left for the Mount of Tur ) , his people contrived a calf out of their ornaments ( which was ) a carving with a mooing sound . Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor show them any path ? They took the same ( as god ) and they were unjust .
And when they felt deeply ashamed of what they had done , and realized that they had really gone astray , they said : If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be among the losers .
And when Musa ( Moses ) returned to his people pent up with anger and grief , he said : You have perpetrated a serious evil in my absence ( after my departure ) . Did you make haste by the Command of your Lord ? And ( Musa [ Moses ] ) put down the Tablets ( of the Torah ) and catching his brothers head pulled him towards himself . ( Then ) Harun ( Aaron ) said : O son of my mother ! Surely these people considered me weak and had nearly killed me ( on my forbidding ) . So do not provide the enemies an opportunity to laugh at me , nor include me among ( the clan of ) these wrongdoers .
Musa ( Moses ) said : O my Lord ! Forgive me and my brother and admit us to ( the Embrace of ) Your Mercy and You are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy .
Surely those who have taken the calf ( as a god ) , the wrath from their Lord will seize them together with humiliation in the life of this world . That is how We punish those who invent falsehood .
But those who perpetrate evil works then repent afterwards and believe , ( then ) after that your Lord is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And when the anger of Musa ( Moses ) became sublimated , he picked up the Tablets , and in the inscription of these ( Tablets ) was ( mentioned ) guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord much .
And Musa ( Moses ) chose seventy men of his people for a time set by Us ( to appear before Our Presence for forgiveness ) , but when a high - scale earthquake seized them ( as punishment for not forbidding the people to perpetrate evil ) , Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O Lord ! If You willed You would destroy these people and me even before this . Will You cause us to perish for that ( omission ) which the foolish among us have committed ? This is just a trail from You by which You hold astray whom You will and guide whom You desire . You alone are our Guardian , so forgive us and have mercy on us . And You are the Best of those who forgive .
And ordain for us good in ( the life of ) this world ( as well as ) in the Hereafter . Surely we have turned and totally inclined towards You . ( Allah ) said : I inflict My punishment on whom I will and My Mercy encompasses everything . So , very soon I shall prescribe this ( mercy ) for those who adopt Godwariness and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly , and it is they who have faith in Our Revelations .
( They are the people ) who follow the Messenger , the Prophet ( titled as ) al - Ummi ( who imparts to the people from Allah the news of the unseen and knowledge and secrets of socio - economic disciplines of life without himself being taught by any human in the world ) ; whose ( eminent attributes and exquisite powers ) these people find written in the Torah and the Injil ( Gospel ) ; who enjoins on them virtues and forbids them vices , declares wholesome things lawful and impure ones unlawful for them and removes from them their heavy burdens and yokes ( shackles ) weighing upon them ( due to their acts of disobedience and blesses them with freedom ) . So those who will believe in this ( most exalted Messenger ) and will venerate and revere him and serve and support him ( in his Din [ Religion ] ) and follow this light ( the Quran ) that has been sent down with him , it is they who will flourish and prosper .
Say : O mankind ! I have ( come ) to all of you ( as ) the Messenger of Allah to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . There is no God except He . He is the One Who grants life and causes death . So believe in Allah and His Messenger who is a Prophet ( crowned with the glory of being ) al - Ummi ( i . e . he has not learnt anything from anyone except Allah but knows far more than the entire creation , and is innocent and pure like a newborn baby despite his upbringing in an infidel and polytheist society ) , who believes in Allah and ( all ) His ( revealed ) Books and follow him alone so that you may take guidance .
And a party among the people of Musa ( Moses ) ( [ Moses ] comprises those ) who guide to the path of truth and according to that ( make judgments based on ) justice .
And We divided them into twelve tribes as separate communities . And when his people asked him for water , We sent ( this ) Revelation to Musa ( Moses ) : Strike that rock with your staff . So twelve springs gushed out from it and every tribe found its drinking place . And We stretched over them clouds for shade and sent down to them manna and quails ( and said to them : ) Eat of the pure things that We have provided for you . ( But ) they have not wronged Us ( by disobedience and disregard ) . They have rather wronged their own souls .
And ( recall ) when it was said to them : Dwell in this town ( Baitul - Maqdis [ Jerusalem ] or Ariha [ Jericho ] ) and eat of it wherever you like and keep saying ( with your tongue ) : Forgive ( our sins ) , and enter the gate ( of the city ) in a state of prostration ; ( then ) We shall forgive all your sins . Soon shall We grant more favours to the pious .
But the unjust among them substituted some other statement for that which they were told . So We sent upon them torment from heaven because they were engaged in injustice and wickedness .
And enquire of them the plight of the town which was situated on the seashore when they transgressed ( the Commandments with regard to the Sabbath ) Saturday . ( This occurred ) when the fish swarmed from all sides appearing to ( the surface of ) water on their ( venerated ) Saturday . And ( the fish ) would not come to them on ( the rest of ) the days which they did not revere like Saturday . We were trying them this way because they were disobedient .
And when a section of them said ( to those who were performing the duty of preaching Dawa ) : Why do you advise a people whom Allah is about to destroy or afflict with severe torment ? they replied : In order to submit ( our ) excuse before your Lord , and ( also ) because they may become righteous and Godwary .
Then , when they forgot ( all ) what they had been advised We delivered those who were engaged in forbidding evil ( i . e . performing the duty of preaching donts ) and seized ( the rest of ) the people who committed injustice ( actively or passively ) with a very harsh punishment because they were disobeying .
Then when they defied ( the command to give up ) what they were prohibited , We commanded them : Be you apes , despised and detested .
And ( also recall the time ) when your Lord announced ( this ) command ( to the Jews ) that ( Allah ) shall be bringing upon them such ( one or the other ) tyrant as would continue afflicting them with evil hardships till the Day of Resurrection . Surely your Lord is Swift in punishment , and indeed He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful ( as well ) .
And We divided them into several communities ( and scattered ) over the earth ( i . e . made them undergo Diaspora ) . Some among them are righteous and , unlike them , others from among the ( same ) folk are ( evildoers ) too . And We tried them with ( both ) prosperity and adversity so that they might turn ( towards Allah ) .
Then after them a characterless people succeeded ( them ) who inherited the Book . These ( successors ) take ( as bribe ) the wealth and riches of this base ( world ) and say : Soon shall we be forgiven , while if more of similar riches come to them , they will take that too . Was the promise of the Book ( of Allah ) not taken from them that they would not say of Allah ( anything ) but the truth ? And they had read ( all ) that was ( written ) in it . And the abode of the Hereafter is of greater value for those who adopt Godwariness . Do you not understand ?
And those who hold fast to the Book ( of Allah ) and establish Prayer ( with punctuality , then ) certainly We do not waste the reward of those who reform .
And ( recall the time ) when We raised the mountain over them as though it were a canopy and they feared it was about to fall on them . ( So We said to them : Do not fear ; instead ) hold fast to that ( Book pragmatically ) which We have given you and bear well in mind those ( injunctions ) which are ( contained ) in it so that you are protected ( from the torment ) .
And ( call to mind ) when your Lord brought forth the human race from the loins of the Children of Adam and made them bear testimony to their own souls ( and said : ) Am I not your Lord ? They ( all ) said : Why not ! We bear witness ( that You alone are our Lord . This He did ) lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection : We were unaware of this promise .
Or ( lest ) you start saying : It was but our ancestors who associated partners with Allah before and we were but ( their ) descendants after them ( i . e . they are the real sinners , not we ) . So , will You destroy us on account of that ( sin ) which the infidels perpetrated ?
And this is how We elucidate Our Revelations so that they may turn ( towards the Truth ) .
And relate to them his account ( too ) whom We gave Our Signs , but then he made an exit from their ( knowledge and admonition ) and Satan chased him . So he turned into one of those who lost the right path .
And had We so willed We would have exalted him by means of ( knowledge and implementation of ) these ( Revelations ) , but he ( himself ) tracked down to ( the lowest levels of the ) earthly life and became the follower of his lust . ( Now ) his example is that of a dog . If you treat him harshly , he will loll out his tongue or if you leave him alone , he will ( still ) loll out his tongue . This example is of those who deny Our Revelations . So relate these occurrences ( to the people ) so that they may contemplate .
As an example they were an extremely bad community who belied Our Revelations ! ( In fact ) they persistently wronged their own souls .
He whom Allah guides so he alone is the rightly guided , but he whom Allah holds astray , it is they who are the losers .
And surely We have created a large ( number ) of jinn and human beings for Hell : They have hearts ( and minds but ) cannot understand ( the Truth ) with them ; and they have eyes ( but ) cannot perceive ( the Truth ) with them ; and ( also ) they possess ears ( but ) cannot hear ( the Truth ) with them . They are like cattle , rather more misguided ( than that ) . It is they who are neglectful .
And the Most Beautiful Names belong to Allah alone , so call on Him by these Names . And leave aside those people who turn away from the Truth with regard to His Names . Soon will they be punished for the ( impious acts ) that they perpetrate .
And of those whom We have created there is ( also ) a section ( of people ) who direct others towards the Truth , and alongside that make judgments based on justice .
But those who deny Our Revelations , We shall soon lead them gradually towards catastrophe in such an imperceptible manner that they will not even notice it .
And I am giving them respite ; indeed My grip is inescapable .
Have they not reflected that the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , who honours them with ( his ) companionship , has not contracted any mania ? He is only a plain Warner ( to the disobedient ) .
Have they not looked into the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever Allah has created ( apart from that ? And have they not considered that ) it may well be that their appointed term ( death ) has drawn near ? Then what will they believe in after this ?
There is no guide for one whom Allah holds astray . And He leaves them to wander in defiance so that they may grope on .
These ( disbelievers ) ask you about the Last Hour : When will it take place ? Say : Knowledge of it rests with my Lord alone ; none but He ( Allah ) will manifest it at its ( appointed ) time . It is ( seemingly ) heavy on ( the residents of ) the heavens and the earth ( due to the horror of its adversities and intensities ) . It will occur to you all of a sudden ( accidentally ) . They ask you ( in such a manner ) as if you are engaged in its pursuit ! Say : Knowledge of it is only with Allah , but most people do not know ( this fact ) .
( Also ) tell ( them ) : I do not have any control over profit and loss for myself , except ( that much ) which Allah wills . And ( in the same way ) if I had the knowledge of the Unseen on my own ( without Allahs bestowal ) , I would myself have managed abundant good fortune ( and victories ) , and no hardship ( and trouble on any occasion ) would have touched me . ( By virtue of my station as a Messenger ) I am only a Warner and Bearer of glad tidings for the believers .
And He ( Allah ) is the One Who has created you from a single soul and made his spouse from that , so that he might find comfort in her . Then when man covers her , she conceives and , bearing a light burden , moves around . Later , when she grows heavy , then both pray to their Lord , Allah : If You give us a healthy child , we shall certainly be among the thankful .
Then when He gives them a healthy child , both of them associate partners with Him in respect of that ( child ) . But Allah is Transcendent of all that they ascribe to Him as partners .
Do they associate those who cannot create anything and have ( themselves ) been created as partners with Him ?
Neither do they have power to help these ( polytheists ) nor can they help even themselves .
And if you call them to ( the path of ) guidance , they will not follow you . For you it is all the same whether you call them ( towards guidance and truth ) or you remain silent .
Surely those ( idols ) whom you worship besides Allah are also slaves ( of Allah ) just like you . So when you call on them , they should answer you if you are true ( in making them gods ) .
Do they have feet to walk with or hands to hold with or eyes to see with or ears to hear with ? Say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Call your ( false ) partners ( for my destruction ) . Then execute ( your ) plot against me and do not give me any respite .
Indeed my Helper is Allah Who has revealed the Book and He is the One Who also protects and helps the pious .
And the ( idols ) whom you worship besides Him have no power to help you , nor can they help themselves .
And if you call them towards guidance , they cannot ( even ) hear . And you see these ( idols ; they are sculptured in such a way ) as if they were looking at you whereas they do not see ( anything ) .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Adopt forbearance , always command piousness , and keep aloof from the ignorant .
And , ( O man , ) if some evil impulse from Satan provokes you ( against these matters ) , seek refuge with Allah . Undoubtedly , He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Surely those who have adopted piety , when some temptation from Satan touches them , they retrospect ( the dos and donts of Allah and the wickedness and hostility of Satan ) . So , the eyes ( of their insight ) open up at the same instant .
And ( as for ) the brothers of these satans , they draw them deeper into error ( by whispering suspicions ) and do not slacken ( in promoting mischief and bloodshed ) .
And when you do not bring them any Sign ( then ) they say : Why have you not brought it contriving yourself ? Say : I just follow that ( command ) which is revealed to me from my Lord . This ( Quran ) is a ( collection ) of conclusive Proofs and Guidance and Mercy from your Lord for those who believe .
And when the Quran is recited , listen to it attentively and observe silence so that mercy may be bestowed upon you .
And remember your Lord in your heart with humility and tearful submissiveness and fear and repentance , and also by calling in low tones . ( Persevere with His remembrance ) morning and evening and be not of the neglectful .
Indeed the ( angels ) who are close in the Presence of your Lord ( never ) turn away from His worship in arrogance , and glorify Him ( all the time ) and remain prostrate before Him .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) They ask you about the spoils of war . Say : The spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . So , fear Allah and keep your mutual matters set aright , and obey Allah and His Messenger if you are believers .
The believers are only those whose hearts , when Allah is mentioned ( before them ) , are filled with awe ( at the very idea of Allahs Greatness and Might ) . And when His Revelations are recited to them , they ( i . e . the ecstatic , delightful , sweet and sublime Words of the Beloved ) increase their faith , and they ( maintain ) their trust in their Lord alone ( under all circumstances and do not look towards anyone other than Him ) .
( They ) are those who establish Prayer and spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of whatever We have bestowed upon them .
It is they who are ( in fact ) the true believers . For them are ( high ) ranks with their Lord and forgiveness and an honourable provision .
( O Beloved ! ) As your Lord brought you forth from your home ( to fight ) for ( the great cause of ) Truth while a section of the believers was unhappy ( about it ) .
They started disputing with you about the cause of Truth even after disclosure ( of the good news that help from Allah would arrive and the forces of Muhammad would triumph [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , as if they were being driven towards death and could see ( death with their eyes ) .
And ( recall the time ) when Allah promised you that dominance and victory over one of the two groups of ( the disbelievers of Makka ) would certainly be yours . And you desired that the ( group ) without weapons ( the weaker one ) should fall into your hands , but Allah willed to establish the Truth by His Words and cut off the roots of the disbelievers ( might and splendour through the Muslims victory over the enemys bigger and well - equipped troops ) .
So that ( the battle of Badr ) might establish ( through this great victory ) the Truth as Truth and falsehood as false , even though the wicked might dislike ( this decisiveness of the armed conflict between the forces of Truth and falsehood ) .
( Remember ) when you were supplicating your Lord ( for support ) and He granted your supplication ( and said : ) I am going to help you with a thousand angels coming in succession .
And Allah made this ( form of help ) merely a good news in order that your hearts are reassured thereby . And ( in truth ) there is no ( other ) help except the help from Allah . Indeed Allah alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
When He brought upon you drowsiness to ( provide you ) feeling of peace and security from Himself and sent down upon you water from the heavens to provide you ( inward and outward ) purity by that and remove from you the filth of Satans ( heretic suspicions ) and invigorate your hearts with ( the strength of certitude ) and with that make your feet ( unshakably ) firm .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! Call to mind also the majestic sight of your glory ) when your Lord revealed to the angels the message : I am ( also ) with you ( to support the Companions of the Messenger ) . So , keep the believers firm - footed and steadfast ( by good news and support ) ; I cast terror and dread ( of Muhammads forces [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) into the hearts of the disbelievers right now . So , strike at the nape of ( the disbelievers ) necks and crush all their tendons and joints .
That is because they defied Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And he who defies Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then surely Allah is to seize ( him ) with severe torment .
This is ( the torment in this world ) , so taste it ( first ) , and surely there is ( another ) torment of Hell ( as well ) for the disbelievers ( in the Hereafter ) .
( O Believers ! ) When you combat the disbelievers ( in the battlefield ) , never turn your backs on them ( even if they are ) a large army .
And he who turns his back on them that day , except he who is maneuvering in fight or he who wants to join one of his own troops ( for support ) , certainly he returns with the wrath of Allah and Hell is his abode and that is ( the most ) evil abode .
( O soldiers of the Army of Islam ! ) It is not you who killed the disbelievers but it is Allah Who killed them , ( and , O Glorious Beloved , ) when you smote ( them with pebbles ) , it was not you who smote them but Allah smote , ( so ) that He confers upon the believers great favours from Him . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
This is ( one favour and bestowal ) , and ( the other is that ) Allah does weaken the plots and deceitful strategies of the disbelievers .
( O disbelievers ! ) If you sought a decisive victory then the victory ( of the Truth ) has certainly reached you . It will be best for you if you desist ( even now ) . But if you opt for the same ( mischief ) We shall ( also ) afflict you with the same ( punishment ) and your army , may it be of any large size , will not be of any avail to you . And Allah is surely on the side of the believers .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not turn away from him while you are hearing .
And do not be like those who said ( by way of betraying ) : We have heard , whereas they do not hear .
Surely the worst of the living creatures in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the dumb who ( neither listen to nor speak the Truth and ) also do not understand ( the Truth ) .
And had Allah known even a little ( inclination towards ) good in them , He would ( certainly ) have made them hear . But ( their state of mind is such that ) if He makes them hear ( the Truth ) , they will ( even then ) turn away , and they are those who are averse ( to the Truth ) .
O Believers ! Whenever the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) calls you for some assignment that brings you ( eternal ) life , present yourselves ( immediately ) , responding to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with submissiveness and obedience . And bear in mind that Allah intervenes between man and his heart ( with a Glory of exclusive nearness ) , and that all of you will ( ultimately ) be gathered towards Him .
And fear the plague which will not afflict exclusively those who are the tyrants among you ( but its victims will also include those who are accomplices in tyranny or who remain indifferent to it ) . And bear in mind that Allah is Severe in inflicting torment .
And ( call to mind the time ) when ( numerically ) you were small ( i . e . in the minority , in the Makkan period , ) and oppressed in the country ( i . e . economically unstable and victims of exploitation ) . You were ( also ) afraid that ( the powerful ) people would snatch you away ( i . e . socially too you were neither free nor secure ) . So , ( after migration to Madina He ( Allah ) provided for you a free and secure abode and strengthened you with His help ( through Islamic rule and power ) and supplied you with sustenance of pure and wholesome things ( through brotherhood , spoils of war and free economy ) so that you may give thanks to Allah ( by means of absolute submission to Allahs Commands ) .
O Believers ! Do not betray the trust of Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in paying them what is their due ) , nor betray your mutual trusts while you know ( the whole truth ) .
And bear in mind that your riches and your children are nothing but a trial and that with Allah alone lies the highest reward .
O Believers ! If you adopt the fear of Allah ( then ) He will set for you a criterion ( and guidance ) to distinguish between Truth and falsehood and will wipe out your sins from your ( record ) and will forgive you . And Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty .
And when the disbelievers were engaged in hatching secret conspiracies against you to captivate you or slay you or banish you ( from the country on the one side ) , they were plotting intrigues , and ( on the other ) Allah was planning His strategy ( to thwart their intrigues ) . And Allah is the Best of the Secret Planners .
And when Our Revelations are recited to them they say : Of course , we have heard . If we desire , we can also compose Verses analogous to that ( Word ) . These are ( nothing ) but the ( imaginary ) tales of the ancients .
And when they said ( sarcastically ) : O Allah ! If this ( Quran ) is really the Truth from Your side , then rain down upon us stones from the sky ( for disobeying it ) or seize us with some grievous torment .
And , ( in truth , the matter is that ) it is not Allahs Glory to torment them while , ( O Venerable Beloved , ) you are also ( present ) among them . Nor will Allah torment them while they are engaged in supplicating Him for forgiveness .
And what might be any other reason that Allah should not punish these ( disbelievers of Makka now after your emigration to Madina ) while they hinder people from the Sacred Mosque ( Kabatullah ) and they do not deserve to be its guardians ( or custodians ) as well ? Its friends ( i . e . guardians ) are but the righteous people , but most of them do not know ( this truth ) .
And their ( so - called ) Prayer at the House of Allah ( Kaba ) is nothing more than whistling and clapping hands . So taste the torment because you used to disbelieve .
Undoubtedly the disbelievers spend their wealth ( in order to influence and ) prevent people from the path of Allahs Din ( Religion ) . So , presently , they will continue spending it , but later ( this spending ) will become for them a source of regret ( i . e . repentance and despondency ) . They will then be overpowered ( by Allahs seizure ) , and those who have adopted disbelief will be driven towards Hell .
So that Allah may separate the impious from the pious and put the impious ( filthy characters ) one over the other and heap them all up together and then cast this ( heap ) into Hell . It is they who are the losers .
Say to those who disbelieve : If they desist ( from their blasphemous acts ) then the ( sins ) which have passed before will be forgiven . But if they repeat the same then the pattern of ( multiple punishments given to ) the forerunners has passed . ( They will also be dealt with the same way . )
And , ( O people of Truth , ) continue your fight against these ( chieftains of oppression and terrorism for the establishment of enduring peace ) , until there does not ( remain ) any disruption and Din ( the system of compliance with law and promoting the phenomena of life ) is devoted to Allah alone . And if they desist , then Allah is surely seeing well ( the action ) that they are accomplishing .
But if they turn away ( from obeying Allah ) , then bear in mind that surely Allah alone is your Excellent Protector ( Patron ) ; what an Excellent Protector ( Patron ) and what an Excellent Helper !
And bear in mind that whatever spoils of war you seize , a fifth of it is for Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and ( the Messengers ) kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarers if you believe in Allah , and in that ( Revelation ) which We sent down on Our ( exalted ) Servant on the Day of Decision ( discrimination between the truth and falsehood ) , the day ( when ) the two armies ( of the believers and the disbelievers ) encountered ( in the battlefield of Badr ) . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
When you were on the nearer bank of the valley ( the Madina side ) and they ( the disbelievers ) on the farther bank ( the other side ) and ( the mercantile ) caravan was below you ; and had you made some mutual appointment ( to fight ) , you would certainly have reached there ( at the timings ) different from ( your ) appointment . ( But Allah brought you face to face at the same time without any appointment . ) This took place in order that Allah might lead that matter to completion which was destined to happen , so that he who had to die might die ( with a manifest ) evidence to that effect , and he who had to survive might continue to live ( with a manifest ) evidence to that effect ( i . e . the evidence be established for all on the Truthfulness of Islam and the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Allah is surely All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
( Recall that episode ) when Allah showed you in your dream ( the army of ) the disbelievers as small in number . And if He ( Allah ) had shown ( them ) to you as greater in number then , ( O Muslims , ) you would have felt dispirited and certainly disputed among yourselves on the question ( of war ) . But Allah saved the Muslims ( from timidity and mutual discord ) . Indeed He is Well Aware of the ( secrets of ) hearts .
And ( also remind them of the sight ) when He , at the time of encounter ( as well ) , made ( the troops of ) the disbelievers appear small ( just ) in your eyes and made you appear small in their eyes ( so that both the armies remain high alert to fight ) in order that Allah leads to completion the ( total defeat of disbelievers resulting from the full - fledged war ) which had been preordained ( by Allah ) . And ( eventually ) all matters are returned to Allah alone .
O Believers ! When you encounter any ( enemy ) army , stand firm and remember Allah abundantly so that you may attain to success .
And obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not quarrel among yourselves lest ( growing disunited and weak ) you become timid and your impact ( power ) loses ground ( before your enemy ) . So be steadfast . Surely Allah is with those who are steadfast .
And be not like those who came out of their homes exhibiting false pride and showing off to the people and who hindered ( the people ) from the path of Allah . And Allah has encompassed ( with His Knowledge and Power ) all the activities they are doing .
And when Satan made the actions of these ( disbelievers ) appear attractive to them and he said ( to them ) : None of the people ( can ) overpower you today and I am certainly your protector ( helper ) . But when both the armies stood ( face to face ) against each other , he turned on his heels and said : I am indeed averse to you . Certainly I see what you do not see . Surely I fear Allah , and Allah is Severe in punishing .
And ( also call to mind the time ) when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is the disease ( of disbelief ) were saying : The Din ( Religion ) of these ( Muslims ) has made them arrogant a great deal . But ( the truth is that ) he who trusts Allah ( then Allah is the Sustainer of all his matters ) . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And you ( will wonder ) if you see ( the spectacle ) when the angels take away the souls of the disbelievers . They continue striking their faces and backs ( with hammers , and say ) : Taste the torment of the Fire ( of Hell ) .
This ( torment ) is in retribution of those ( impious acts ) which your hands have sent forward , and Allah does not at all do injustice to His servants .
( The case of these disbelievers is also like that of ) the people of Pharaoh and those who preceded them . They ( too ) denied the Revelations of Allah . So , Allah seized them ( with torment ) for their sins . Surely , Allah is Mighty , Severe in afflicting torment .
This ( torment ) is because Allah never changes any blessing that He grants affluently to some people till they change their blessed state themselves ( i . e . when they commit ingratitude , disobedience and sins and even lose the sense of loss they are seized by destruction and devastation ) . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
This ( torment too ) is on the pattern of the people of Pharaoh and those who preceded them : they ( also ) denied the Signs of their Lord . So , We destroyed them due to their sins and We drowned the people of Pharaoh ( in the river ) . And they all were oppressors .
Surely , worse than ( even ) all the beasts in the sight of Allah are the people who disbelieve . So they do not come to believe .
They are the ones from whom you took promise ( many a time ) , but they break their promise every time and do not fear ( Allah ) .
So if you come upon them in the battlefield , then by killing them ( for violating peace treaty ) in an exemplary manner , make those ( also ) run on their heels who are behind them , so that they may learn a lesson of warning .
And if you apprehend treachery from a people , then throw their promise back to them on the basis of equality . Indeed Allah does not like the treacherous .
And let not the disbelievers ever assume that they have escaped ( safe and sound ) . Assuredly they can never make ( Us ) powerless .
And , ( O Muslims , ) muster up as much might as you can ( in the form of weapons and equipment of war ) and ( also formations ) of war steeds ( i . e . war mounts to combat ) them . Cause terror with this ( war readiness ) amongst the enemy of Allah and your enemy , and also those besides them whose ( secret enmity ) you know not ; Allah knows them . And whatever you spend in the way of Allah , you will be paid back in full , and you will not be done any injustice .
And if they ( the disbelievers ) incline to reconciliation , you also incline to it and put your trust in Allah . Surely He alone is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if they seek to deceive you , then surely Allah is Sufficient for you . He is the One Who has given you strength with His help and with the believers .
And ( He is the One Who ) awakened mutual love among the hearts of the ( Muslims ) . If you had spent whatever exists in the earth , you could never have inculcated this ( love ) in their hearts ( with all these material resources ) . But Allah roused that love among them ( through a spiritual relation ) . Allah is indeed Almighty , Most Wise .
O ( Glorious ) Messenger ! Sufficient for you is Allah and those Muslims who have committed themselves to follow in your footsteps .
O ( Venerable ) Messenger ! Motivate the believers to fight ( i . e . prepare them to fight for the Truth ) . If there are twenty of you firm and steadfast ( in the event of war ) , they will overpower two hundred ( disbelievers ) and if ( one ) hundred of you are ( steadfast ) , they will overpower ( one ) thousand of the disbelievers because they do not have the concept ( of the Hereafter and its great reward . So , they cannot fight with that zeal and enthusiasm which the believers are charged with , because they have sold their souls for Paradise and the pleasure of Allah . )
Allah has , at present , lightened the burden ( of His Commandment ) on you . He knows that there is ( some degree of ) weakness in you . So ( now after mitigation the Command is ) that if there are ( one ) hundred resolute and steadfast ( men ) from amongst you , they will overpower two hundred ( disbelievers ) . And if there are ( one ) thousand of you , they will triumph over two thousand ( disbelievers ) by the Command of Allah and Allah is with those who remain steadfast . ( This is a target fixed for the believers and the minimum possible effect the vehemence of their faith should realize in the battlefield . )
This is not a Messengers glory that he should have ( disbelievers as ) prisoners of war , until he has let much of the blood of these ( mischief - monger terrorist militants ) in the land . You ( people ) desire the riches of the world , and Allah intends ( prosperity in ) the Hereafter and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Had there not been a prior decree ( Command for forgiveness ) from Allah , a terrible torment would indeed have seized you for ( the ransom ) that you procured ( from the prisoners of Badr ) .
So eat of the lawful and wholesome spoils of war you have obtained and keep fearing Allah . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Messenger ! Say to the prisoners of war who are in your hands : If Allah knows any good in your hearts , He will bestow on you better than that ( wealth ) which has been taken from you ( as ransom ) , and He will forgive you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And , ( O Beloved , ) if they want to betray you so they have certainly betrayed Allah before this ( as well ) . And , ( for the same reason ) He has placed some of them under ( your ) authority . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Indeed those who have embraced faith and have emigrated ( for the cause of Allah ) and have fought in the way of Allah with their material as well as human resources , and those who have provided ( the immigrants ) with shelter and helped ( them ) , it is they who are real friends of one another . And those who have believed ( but ) have not emigrated ( for Allah ) you do not owe anything to them for their friendship till they emigrate . And if they seek from you help in ( matters of ) Din ( Religion ) , it will be your duty to help them , except against a people between whom and you there is a ( peace ) treaty . And Allah is Most Vigilant to all ( the works ) that you are doing .
And those who disbelieve are the allies of one another . ( O Muslims ! ) If you do not extend ( to one another ) the same ( help and cooperation for the cause of Allah ) , then great mischief and disruption ( for the dominance of infidelity and falsehood ) will break out in the land .
And those who believed and emigrated and fought in the cause of Allah and those who provided shelter ( to those who sacrificed their households and homeland in the cause of Allah ) and helped ( them ) are the people who are in fact true Muslims . They are the ones for whom is forgiveness and an honourable provision .
And those who believed afterwards , and left their homes ( sacrificing ) in the cause of Truth , and joined you in fighting , they are ( also ) from amongst you . And ( as for inheritance and affinity with blood relations ) the relatives have a higher claim on one another in the Book of Allah . Surely Allah knows best everything .
Absolution ( renunciation ) is declared from Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) to those polytheists with whom you had made a treaty ( of reconciliation and peace , and they did not fulfil the treaty ) .
So , ( O polytheists , ) you may move about in the land ( for ) four months . ( You will have to face war on expiry of this term ) . And bear in mind that you cannot at all weaken Allah , and surely Allah is the Abaser of the disbelievers .
( These Verses ) are a ( public ) declaration from Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) for all mankind on the day of the Great Pilgrimage that Allah is absolved of all obligations to the polytheists , and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] too ( is free from all obligations to them ) . So , ( O polytheists , ) if you repent that is better for you , but if you turn away then know that you cannot at all make Allahs strategy ineffective . And , ( O Beloved , ) warn the disbelievers of a grievous torment .
Except those idolaters with whom you made an agreement , who then did not show any latitude ( in executing the treaty ) and who did not support ( or reinforce ) anyone against you . So fulfil the treaty with them till the end of the term . Surely Allah loves those who fear Him .
So when the sacred months have passed , then kill the idolaters ( for the violation of peace treaty ) wherever you find them and capture them , imprison them and lie in wait for them at every place of ambush ( to catch and besiege them ) . So , if they repent , establish Prayer and start paying Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , then leave their way open . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And if any of the idolaters seeks asylum with you , provide him with protection until he listens to the Words of Allah . Then escort him to his haven . This is because these people do not possess the knowledge ( of the Truth ) .
( How ) can there be a promise for the polytheists with Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) except for those with whom you have made a treaty near the Sacred Mosque ( at Hudaibiya ) ? So as long as they remain true to ( the treaty with ) you , you remain true to them . Surely , Allah loves those who fear Him .
How ( can one expect from them honouring of the agreement ? ) They are in such a state that if they overpower you they will have regard neither for any tie of kinship with you nor for any covenant . They please you with lip service only , but their hearts deny ( all what they say ) . And most of them are those who break agreements .
They gained a paltry price ( in terms of worldly interests ) for the Revelations of Allah and then started hindering ( people ) from His path ( of Din [ Religion ] ) . Indeed it is an extremely evil activity which they keep doing .
They have no regard either for a tie of kinship or a covenant in respect of a Muslim , and they are the people who have exceeded limits ( in disobedience ) .
( Even ) then if they repent and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) they are your brothers in Din ( Religion ) . And We elucidate ( Our ) Revelations in detail for those who possess knowledge and understanding .
And if after making promise they break their oaths and taunt you with sarcasm in your Din ( Religion ) , then wage war against ( those ) chieftains of disbelief . Surely their oaths are not worth any regard , so that they desist ( from their mischief - mongering ) .
Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and decided to banish the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) while the first time it is they who triggered against you ( war and violation of the agreement ) ? Do you fear them ? But Allah has more right that you should fear Him , provided you are believers .
Fight against them ( to eliminate militancy and terrorism ) . Allah will torment them at your hands and will humiliate them , and will help you ( in your fight ) against them , and will heal the breasts of the believers .
And He will sublimate distress and fury in their hearts , and will accept repentance of whom He wills . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Do you think that you will be spared ( without passing through troubles and hardships ) , while Allah has not ( yet ) made distinctly known those amongst you who have fought in the way of Allah and ( who ) have not taken anyone as a confidant besides Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ? And Allah is Well - Aware of the deeds that you do .
It is not for the polytheists to maintain and frequent the mosques of Allah whereas they themselves bear witness to their disbelief . All their deeds have become void and in Hell will they dwell forever .
Only he who believes in Allah and the Last Day and establishes Prayer and pays Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and who fears none but Allah can maintain and frequent the mosques of Allah . So they alone are expected to become the rightly guided .
Do you consider ( mere ) serving of drinking water to the pilgrims and the management of populating and maintaining the Sacred Mosque ( an act ) equal to ( the works of ) a person who believes in Allah and the Last Day and fights in the cause of Allah ? They cannot be equal in the sight of Allah and Allah does not guide those who do injustice .
Those who have believed and have emigrated and have consistently toiled hard in the cause of Allah with their material and human resources enjoy very high rank in the Presence of Allah , and it is they who have achieved the ultimate goal .
Their Lord gives them glad tidings of Mercy from Him and of ( His ) pleasure and of ( those ) Gardens for them in which there are eternal delights .
They will reside therein forever . Surely , with Allah is the mighty reward .
O Believers ! Do not take your fathers ( and forefathers ) and brothers for friends if they love disbelief more than belief . And whoever of you befriends them , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Say : If your fathers ( and forefathers ) and your sons ( and daughters ) and your brothers ( and sisters ) and your wives and your ( other ) kith and kin and the riches that you have earned ( so hard ) and the trade and business that you fear may decline and the homes you are fond of are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and struggling in His cause , then wait until Allah brings His command ( of torment ) . And Allah does not guide the disobedient .
Assuredly , Allah has helped you on a great many occasions and ( in particular ) on the day of Hunain , when superiority of your ( numerical strength ) exhilarated you . Then that ( numerical superiority ) could not prove to you of any avail and the earth , despite its vast expanse , narrowed for you , and then you turned your backs in retreat .
Allah then sent down His Tranquillity ( Mercy ) upon His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers and sent down ( such ) armies ( of angels ) that you could not see . And He tormented those who were engaged in disbelief ; and that is the punishment of the disbelievers .
Then even after this Allah accepts repentance of the one He wills ( i . e . He blesses him with an aptness for Islam and His Merciful Eye ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! The polytheists are an embodiment of impurity . So let them not come closer to the Sacred Mosque after this year of theirs ( i . e . after victory over Makka in 9 A . H . ) . If you fear poverty ( due to decline in your trade ) then ( do not worry ) . Allah will soon enrich you from His Bounty if He so wills . Surely , Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( O Muslims ! ) Fight ( also ) those of the People of the Book who do not have faith in Allah and the Last Day , and do not consider unlawful the things which Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) have declared unlawful , and do not adopt the True Din ( [ Religion ] of Islam ) until they give in and surrender ( to the Command of Islam ) , and pay the capitation tax with their own hand after having been subdued .
And the Jews said : Uzayr ( Ezra ) is the son of Allah , and the Christians said : The Messiah is the son of Allah . These are their ( absurd ) utterances that they voice with their mouths . They ( acquire ) resemblance with the saying of those who have disbelieved before ( them ) . May Allah ruin them ! Where are they wandering distracted ?
They took their priests and monks for lords besides Allah and ( also ) the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , while in truth they had not been given ( any ) command except to worship ( only ) the One God besides Whom there is no God . Holy is He far above those that they associate with Him as partners .
They desire to extinguish the Light of Allah by blowing through their mouths . And Allah rejects ( it ) but ( wills ) to manifest His Light to its fullness , even though the disbelievers dislike ( it ) .
Allah is He Who sent His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with guidance and Din ( Religion ) of Truth to make him ( the Messenger ) dominant over every ( other exponent of ) Din ( Religion ) though much to the dislike of polytheists .
O Believers ! Indeed the majority of the priests and monks ( of the People of the Book ) devour the wealth of the people through unfair ( means ) and hinder from the path of Allah ( i . e . fill their safes with peoples money and hinder it from being spent for the publicity and promotion of the True Din [ Religion ] ) . And those who hoard silver and gold and do not spend it in the cause of Allah , warn them of a grievous torment .
The Day when this ( gold , silver and wealth ) will be heated in the Fire of Hell , their foreheads , sides and backs will be branded with this ( heated material , and it will be said to them : ) This is the same ( wealth ) that you treasured for ( the benefit of ) your souls . So taste ( this wealth ) which you had been amassing .
Indeed the number of months with Allah has been ( inscribed as ) twelve in the Book of Allah ( i . e . permanent Law of Nature ) since the Day He created the ( system of ) the heavens and the earth . Of these four months ( Rajab , Dhul - Qada , Dhul - Hijja and Muharram ) are sacred . This is the right Din ( Religion ) . So do not wrong your souls during these months ( by initiating and involving yourselves in fighting and war ) and fight against all the idolaters ( in retaliation ) the same way as they all fight against you ( allied ) , and bear in mind that Allah is surely with the Godfearing .
Postponing and deferring ( the sacred months ) is just an addition to disbelief . By this the disbelievers are led astray ; they , in one year , count it lawful and in another year regard it forbidden to complete the count ( of the months ) which Allah has made sacred and ( also ) make that ( month ) lawful which Allah has declared unlawful . Their evil deeds have been made attractive to them and Allah does not guide the community of disbelievers .
O Believers ! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to set out ( to fight ) in the way of Allah you , weighing heavier , bend towards ( the material and ignoble world of ) the earth ? Are you pleased with the life of this world rather than the Hereafter ? So , the property and belongings of the life of this world are worthless in ( comparison with ) the Hereafter ( and carry ) but little ( value ) .
If you do not move out ( to fight for the promotion of peace and human dignity ) , He will afflict you with grievous torment and will replace you with another people and you will not be able to do Him any harm . And Allah has Mighty Power over everything .
If you do not help him ( the Holy Messenger of Allah in the struggle for the dominance of Islam , then what ! ) . Indeed Allah helped him ( also at the time ) when the disbelievers drove him away ( from Makka , his homeland , ) while he was the second of the two ( immigrants ) . Both ( the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and Abu Bakr ) were in the cave ( of Mount Thawr ) when he said to his Companion ( Abu Bakr ) : Do not grieve . Allah is surely with us . So , Allah sent down His serenity upon him and strengthened him by means of such armies ( of angels ) that you could not see and He made the word of the disbelievers the lowermost and Allahs Word is ( always ) the uppermost and exalted . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Light or heavy , march forth ( under all circumstances ) and fight in the cause of Allah with your material and human resources . It is better for you if you are ( reality ) conscious .
Had the benefit ( booty ) been a near gain and the journey ( of fighting ) easy and moderate then they ( i . e . the hypocrites ) would certainly have followed you . But ( that ) arduous journey appeared to them far too long . And they would ( now ) swear by Allah soon : Had we been able to go , we would certainly have marched forth with you . They are drawing upon themselves ( added ) destruction ( by these lies ) , and Allah knows that they are liars beyond doubt .
Allah safeguard ( protect and exalt ) you ! Why did you permit them ( to stay back , not to participate in war ) , till those who were speaking the truth would be exposed to you and you would ( also ) know the liars ?
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day will not seek from you ( this ) permission that they should ( not ) fight with their possessions and lives . And Allah knows the Godfearing full well .
Only those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt will seek leave ( exemption from fighting ) from you . So in their doubt they are bewildered , lost in disorientation .
If they had ( really ) resolved to move out ( for fighting ) they would have procured ( at least some ) equipment for that . But ( the fact is that owing to their falsehood and hypocrisy ) Allah disliked ( even ) their rising up ( for fighting ) . So , He stopped them ( there ) . And it was said to them : Sit in the company of those who sit ( shirking from fight ) .
If they had come out ( joining you ) , they would have added nothing to you except mischief and disorder and would have strived hard amongst you ( to stir up disaffection and discord ) . They want to bring about subversion within you and ( even now some of ) their spies are there among you . And Allah is Well Aware of the wrongdoers .
The truth is that they have been trying to cause subversion earlier too , and have been contriving schemes to upset your programmes until the Truth came and the Decree of Allah prevailed , though they disliked ( it ) downright .
And among them is ( also ) he who says : Accord me permission ( to stay back home instead of going to fight ) and put me not into trial . Listen , they have plunged ( themselves ) into trial and assuredly Hell has encompassed the disbelievers .
If some good ( or some comfort ) betides you it grieves them , but if some adversity ( or trouble ) befalls you then they say : We had adopted ( precaution in ) our work in advance , and they turn away rejoicing .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : Never shall ( anything ) befall us but what Allah has prescribed for us ; He alone is our Protector . And in Allah alone the believers should put their trust .
Say : Are you waiting for simply one of the two good fortunes in our favour ( i . e . victory or martyrdom : whether we are martyred or return victorious ) ? And we are waiting in your favour ( in view of your hypocrisy ) to see Allah afflict you with ( special ) torment either from Himself or at our hands . So wait . We ( too ) are waiting with you ( to see whose wait comes out to be productive ) .
Say : Spend willingly or unwillingly , this ( money ) will not be accepted from you at all . You are indeed a disobedient people .
And there is nothing that stands in the way of acceptance of their spending ( i . e . charity donations ) except that they deny Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and come to offer Prayer but lazily and unwillingly and ( also ) they do not spend ( in the cause of Allah ) but feeling displeased .
So neither their wealth nor their children should amaze you . It is for these ( things ) only that Allah intends to punish them in the life of this world and that their souls may depart while they are in a state of disbelief .
And ( they are so cowardly that ) they swear by Allah that they are of you while they are not of you . But they are those who fear ( the disclosure and outcome of their hypocrisy . So they appear to be Muslims as make - believe ) .
( Their state of mind is such that ) could they find a place of refuge or a cave or a crevice in the earth , they would turn towards it running very fast ( and would not stay with you even for a moment , but they are under compulsion right now so they show off their untrue loyalty ) .
And some among them are those who pass sarcastic remarks against you in the matter of ( distribution of ) alms . If they are given some portion of ( the alms ) they feel pleased , but if nothing is given to them they feel annoyed at once .
How good it would have been if they had felt pleased with what Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] had given them and said : Sufficient for us is Allah . Allah will soon confer on us His Bounty and so will His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) bestow ( in addition ) . Indeed we are inclined to Allah alone . ( And the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is His mediator ; in fact his bestowal is Allahs . Had they developed this belief and refrained from sarcasm , it would have been better . )
Indeed alms ( Zakat ) are meant for the poor and the indigent , and those who are deployed to collect charities and those in whose hearts the inculcation of love for Islam is aimed at . And , ( moreover , spending Zakat for ) freeing of human lives ( from the yoke of slavery ) and removing the burden of those who are to pay debt and ( those who toil hard ) in the cause of Allah and the wayfarers ( is true ) . This ( all ) has been prescribed by Allah and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And among these ( hypocrites ) are also those who hurt ( the Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and say : He is only an ear ( believes everything he hears ) . Say : He is all ears to what is good for you ; he believes in Allah and has faith in ( what ) the believers ( say ) and is mercy for those of you who have embraced faith . And those who hurt the Messenger of Allah ( by means of their evil beliefs , doubts and foul tongue ) for them is grievous torment .
O Muslims ! They ( the hypocrites ) swear by Allah before you to keep you pleased whereas Allah along with His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) has a greater right that they should please Him . If they are the believers , ( they should have known this fact and should have pleased the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . Allah is pleased only if the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] is pleased because their pleasure is but one and the same ) .
Do they not know that he who opposes Allah and His Messenger , the Fire of Hell is ( destined ) for him wherein he will live forever ? There is no humiliation greater than this .
The hypocrites feel scared that a Sura ( chapter ) will be sent down to the Muslims and that will make them aware of those matters that are ( hidden ) in the hearts ( of the hypocrites ) . Say : Continue mocking . Surely Allah is about to reveal that ( matter ) which you are scared of .
If you ask them , they will certainly say : We used only to talk ( away the journey ) and enjoy . Say : Were you mocking Allah , His Revelations and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) ?
( Now ) do not make excuses . You have certainly become disbelievers after ( showing that ) you believed . If We forgive a party of you , ( even then ) We shall torment the other party because they sinned .
The hypocrites , men and women , are one from another ( alike ) . They command evil and forbid good and are close - fisted ( in the matter of spending in the cause of Allah ) . They have forgotten Allah , so Allah has forgotten them . It is indeed the hypocrites who are disobedient .
Allah has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the disbelievers the Fire of Hell in which ( they ) will live forever . That ( Fire ) will suffice them . And Allah has cast His curse upon them , and for them is torment that will last forever .
( O Hypocrites ! ) You are like those who preceded you . They were far mightier than you in power and far richer in possessions and progeny . They benefited by their share ( of the world ) ; so are you enjoying your portion ( the same way ) as your predecessors enjoyed their fixed share ( of the worldly pleasures ) . Moreover , you ( too in like manner ) have indulged deep in falsehood as they indulged deep in falsehood . Their works have gone fruitless in this world and in the Hereafter , and they are the ones who are the losers .
Has not the news reached them of those who were before them - the people of Nuh ( Noah ) , Ad and Thamud and the people of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the citizens of Madyan and the dwellers of the towns which were overturned ? Their Messengers ( too ) came to them with clear Signs ( but they disobeyed ) . So , it was not Allahs glory to wrong them , but it was they who used to wrong themselves ( because of rejecting the Truth ) .
The believers , men and women , are helpers and friends to one another . They command good and forbid evil and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . It is they on whom Allah will soon shower His Mercy . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Allah has promised the believers , men and women , Gardens with streams flowing beneath . They will dwell therein forever . And ( He has also promised ) such blessed mansions as are located at a special site in Paradise amidst evergreen Gardens , and ( then ) the greatest ( bliss of all ) is the Pleasure and Acceptance of Allah ( which will be awarded as a mighty compensation ) . This indeed is the highest achievement .
O ( Glorious ) Messenger ! Fight against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and treat them harshly ( for violating peace and human rights ) . And Hell is their abode and that is an evil abode .
( These hypocrites ) swear by Allah that they have not said ( anything ) , whereas they have definitely uttered blasphemy and have become disbelievers after ( showing ) their belief in Islam . They intended ( many tortures too ) that they could not achieve . And ( out of Islam and the Messengers conduct ) they could not disdain anything , except that Allah and His Messenger had made them affluent with His Bounty . So if they repent ( even now ) , it will be better for them , but if they remain averse ( the same way ) , then Allah will afflict them with grievous torment ( both ) in ( the life of ) this world and in the Hereafter and they will not have any helper or friend on earth .
And among these ( hypocrites ) are also ( some ) who made a promise with Allah : If He bestows upon us ( riches ) out of His Bounty , we shall certainly give alms ( in His Way ) and become of the righteous .
So when He conferred on them ( wealth ) out of His Bounty , they became miserly with it and turned back retracting from ( their promise ) .
So He made hypocrisy in their hearts a consequence ( of their own niggardliness ) till the Day when they would meet Him , because they violated the promise they had made with Allah and ( also ) because they used to tell lies .
Do they not know that Allah is aware of their secrets and their whisperings and that Allah knows best all unseen things ?
The people who accuse ( of pretentiousness and compulsion ) those of the believers who give alms happily and willingly in ( their ) charity works , and also ( blame ) those ( destitute Muslims ) who find nothing ( more to give ) except for their toil and hard work , and ( also ) mock their ( sentiment for spending in the cause of Allah ) , Allah will punish them for their scoffing and there is for them a grievous punishment .
Whether or not you seek forgiveness for these ( wicked and arrogant hypocrites who dare scoff at your eminence ) , if you implore forgiveness for them seventy times ( out of your natural compassion and your benevolent practice of forgiving and forbearing ) , even then Allah will not forgive them at all because they have rejected Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and Allah does not guide the rebels .
( These hypocrites ) who stayed back ( from fighting ) due to opposing Allahs Messenger are rejoicing over their sitting behind . They disliked it that they should strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives and said : Do not move out in this heat . Say : The Fire of Hell is fiercer in heat by far . ( How good it would be ) if they could only understand !
So they should laugh for a while and weep for long ( because they will have to weep for long in the Hereafter ) as a recompense for what they used to earn .
So , ( O Beloved , ) if Allah again takes you back to a party of these ( hypocrites , after getting free from the battle of Tabuk , ) and they seek your permission to go forth ( for fight in the event of some future conflict ) , then say to them : ( Now ) you shall never go forth with me , nor shall you ever fight an enemy accompanying me ( because , abandoning the sacred struggle , ) you rejoiced over sitting behind the first time . So , ( this time as well ) stay behind along with those who remain behind .
And never perform ( funeral ) Prayer over any of these ( hypocrites ) who dies , nor stand at his grave ( because your stepping on some place also brings about mercy and blessings , and they do not deserve your mercy and blessing ) . Indeed they disbelieved Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and died as defiant .
Let not their riches and their progeny make you wonder . Allah wants only to torment them in this world ( too ) by means of these things and that their souls may depart while they are ( still ) disbelievers .
And when ( such ) a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed : Believe in Allah and fight in the cause of Allah along with His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , the affluent and the influential amongst them seek leave from you and say : Leave us . We shall remain with those who sit ( behind ) .
They liked that they would be with those women , children and the handicapped who would stay behind . And their hearts have been sealed , so they do not understand anything .
But the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and those who believed with him fight in the cause of Allah with their material and human resources . And for them are all good things and they are the ones who will achieve their goal .
Allah has prepared for them Gardens beneath which streams flow . They are their permanent residents . This indeed is a colossal achievement .
And a few feigners from among the desert nomads came ( to the Holy Messenger to submit excuse ) so that they might ( also ) be accorded permission , and those who lied to Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in their claim to be the believers ) stayed behind ( having forsaken fight ) . Those of them who denied the Truth would soon be seized by torturous torment .
There is no sin on the aged ( weak ) and the sick , nor on those who are not so ( affluent ) that they may spend while they are most sincerely and truly devoted to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . No way can the righteous ( i . e . the spiritually excellent ) be blamed and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Nor can ( anyway be scoffed or blamed ) those who presented themselves to your service ( with the purpose ) that you may arrange for them mounts ( for fighting , because they did not posses any means of conveyance ) . So you said : I ( also ) do not find any ( additional means ) to mount you on . Then ( with your permission ) they returned in such a state that their eyes were streaming with tears in grief ( of being deprived of fighting in the cause of Allah : Alas ! ) They did not have ( that much ) wealth which they could spend ( and manage to take part in the holy fight ) .
( Blame ) lies only on those who seek your permission though they are affluent . They feel pleased to remain with the women and the handicapped who stay behind . Allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not understand ( what is the true loss or gain ) .
( O Muslims ! ) When you return to them ( from the expedition of Tabuk ) they will offer their apologies to you . ( O Beloved ! ) Say : Do not make excuses ; we will not at all believe you . Allah has informed us about your state of affairs . Now ( in future ) Allah as well as His Messenger will monitor your performance ( in the world ) . Then ( in the Hereafter too ) you will be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows everything hidden and manifest and He will make you know ( all your works ) that you used to do .
Now they will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you may excuse them . So be indifferent to them . Surely they are unclean and Hell is their abode , a reward for what they used to earn .
They swear to you so that you may feel pleased with them . So , ( O Muslims , ) if you are pleased with them ( even ) then Allah will not be pleased with the disobedient people .
( These ) nomad villagers are unyielding disbelievers and incorrigible hypocrites . And ( due to their stubbornness in disbelief and hypocrisy ) they deserve to remain ignorant of those limits and commandments which Allah has sent down to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And among these nomad villagers there is ( also ) one who regards that ( money ) which he spends ( in the cause of Allah ) as a compulsory fine , and looks forward to the spinning evil ( of miseries and misfortunes ) coming upon you . But it is they whom the evil spin ( of calamity and ill - fortune ) is going to whirl . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( yet ) among these nomads there is ( also ) one who believes in Allah and the Last Day and considers whatever he spends ( in the way of Allah ) as a means of nearness to Allah and receiving ( merciful ) supplications of the Messenger . Listen ! Assuredly it is a source of nearness to Allah . Allah will soon admit them to His Mercy . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The pioneer emigrants and their supporters ( Ansar ) , the vanguard of the believers , and those who follow them in the grade of spiritual excellence Allah is well pleased with them ( all ) and they ( all ) are well pleased with Him . And He has prepared for them Gardens with rivers flowing under them . They will live in them forever . This is indeed a colossal achievement .
And , ( O Muslims , ) some among the nomad villagers around you and some citizens of Madina as well are hypocrites . They are adamant about hypocrisy . ( So far ) you know them not ; We know them . ( Later , the Holy Messenger was also given the knowledge and gnosis ( of all the hypocrites . ) Soon shall We torment them twice ( here in this world ) . Then they will be turned towards greater torment ( on the Day of Rising ) .
And there are others ( who ) have confessed their sins . They have mixed up good deeds with some bad ones ( by mistake ) . Allah will , most likely , accept their repentance . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Collect from their wealth alms ( Zakat the Alms - due ) so that by these ( alms ) you may purify them ( of their sins ) and ( by this purification of faith and riches ) bestow upon them blessing and pray for them . Surely your prayer is a ( source of ) delightful calm for them . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Do they not know that indeed He is Allah alone Who accepts repentance of His servants and takes charity donations ( i . e . Zakat and alms with His own Mighty Hand ) and that Allah is the One Who is Oft - Relenting , Ever - Merciful ?
And say : Do work . Allah as well as His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ( too ) will soon see your work . And you will shortly be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows everything veiled and unveiled . So He will inform you of the works that you used to do .
And there are ( yet ) others who are deferred , left to the ( next ) Command of Allah . He will either torment them or accept their repentance . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And ( from among the hypocrites there are also those ) who have erected a mosque to harm ( the Muslims ) and ( promote ) disbelief and disunite the believers and as an ambush for the one who is already at war against Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . They will surely swear : We have intended nothing but good ( by constructing this mosque ) . And Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars .
( O Beloved ! ) Never stand in this ( building which has been built in the name of a mosque ) . But the mosque which has been , from the very first day , founded on the fear of Allah has greater right to be honoured with your standing in it . There are people in it who love to remain purified ( both physically and spiritually ) , and Allah loves those who commit themselves to purity .
Who is better the one who founds his edifice ( i . e . mosque ) on the fear of Allah and ( His ) pleasure and satisfaction or the one who lays the foundation of his building on the edge of a crumbling precipice ? So , that ( building ) tumbled down with its architect into the Fire of Hell ? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
Their structure which they have raised ( in the name of a mosque ) will continue pricking their hearts ( due to doubt and hypocrisy ) , except that their hearts are torn to pieces ( due to persistently piercing concern ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Surely , Allah has bought from the believers their souls and wealth in return for Paradise for them . ( Now ) they fight in the way of Allah . So they kill ( for the Truth ) and are slain ( themselves too . Allah has taken ) the firm promise as a bountiful obligation on Him in the Torah , the Gospel ( the Injil ) and the Quran . And who is truer to his promise than Allah ? So , ( believers , ) rejoice over your bargain against which you have sold ( your souls and wealth ) . This is but a colossal achievement .
( These believers who have bargained with Allah for the Hereafter are those ) who turn to Allah in repentance , worship , praise and glorify ( Allah ) , fast , abstain from the worldly lusts , bow down before Him ( most humbly and submissively ) and prostrate themselves before Him ( seeking His nearness ) , command good and forbid evil and guard the limits ( set ) by Allah . And give glad tidings to these believers .
It is not the glory of the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the dignity of the believers that they pray for forgiveness of the polytheists , even though they are kindred , after it has become clear to them that they ( the polytheists ) are the inmates of Hell .
And Ibrahims ( Abrahams ) praying for his fathers ( i . e . Azar , his uncle who brought him up ) forgiveness was only due to the promise that he had made to him . But when it became evident to him that he was an enemy of Allah , he parted with him ( dissociated himself from him and never prayed for him afterwards ) . Surely Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was most compassionate ( tender - hearted , tearful ) and profoundly forbearing .
And it is not Allahs Glory to lead a people astray after guiding them aright , until He makes clear to them the things which they should guard against . Surely Allah knows best everything .
Verily He is Allah to Whom belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . He ( is the One Who ) gives life and causes death . And besides Allah there is for you no friend or helper ( who can support you against Allahs Command ) .
Surely Allah turned in His Mercy towards the Messenger ( Allah bless him and give him peace ) and ( also ) towards the Emigrants and the Helpers who followed him ( even ) in the hour of distress ( of the battle of Tabuk ) , after ( the situation emerged wherein ) the hearts of a party of them had nearly deviated . Then He turned towards them with Bestowal and Mercy . Allah is indeed Most Compassionate and Ever - Merciful towards them .
And ( He also turned towards ) those three persons ( with Merciful Compassion ) whose ( decision ) was deferred until when the earth , despite all its vastness , closed in upon them and their ( own ) souls ( too ) became cumbersome for them , and they knew for sure that there is no refuge from ( the torment of ) Allah except in ( turning towards ) Him . Allah then inclined towards them in Bestowal and Kindness so that they ( too ) might persevere with repentance and inclination . Surely Allah is the One Who is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fear Allah persistently and remain in the ( company ) of those who uphold the Truth .
It was unbecoming the people of Madina and the villagers ( inhabitants ) of suburbs to lag behind ( stepping aside ) from Allahs Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , nor to feel for their own souls greater concern than his ( blessed and sacred ) soul . This ( command ) is because in the cause of Allah ( whatever ) thirst they suffer , ( whatever ) turmoil they undergo , ( whatever ) hunger they endure , and stepping on a track where treading rouses violent reaction among the disbelievers and whatever they receive from the enemy ( killing and injury or spoils of war ) : in recompense of everything is recorded but a good deed to their credit . Surely , Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous .
They ( who fight in the cause of Allah ) do not spend any amount small or great , nor do they journey through a valley but that ( all this expense and journey ) is written down for them so that Allah may confer on them the best reward ( for every such act ) that they used to do .
And it is not possible for all the Muslims to set out ( together ) . So , why should a party from within every group ( or tribe ) not go forth in order that they may acquire deeper knowledge ( i . e . thorough understanding and insight ) of Din ( Religion ) , and warn their people when they return to them so that they may guard themselves ( against a life of sins and disobedience ) .
O Believers ! Fight against those of the disbelievers who are around you ( i . e . who are damaging you and your Din [ Religion ] directly ) . And ( fight in a way and at a time that ) they find in you toughness ( of might and valour ) . And bear in mind that Allah is with those who guard themselves against evil .
And whenever a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed , some of these ( hypocrites ) say ( mischievously ) : Whose faith amongst you has this ( Sura ) increased ? So , this ( Sura ) has increased the faith of those who have embraced faith and they rejoice ( over this boosted state of faith ) .
But those whose hearts are diseased , this ( Sura ) has added vileness ( and impurity ) to their filth ( disbelief and hypocrisy ) . And they died as disbelievers .
Do they not see that they are put in trouble once or twice every year ? ( Even ) then they do not repent , nor do they take advice .
Whenever a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed , they look at one another ( and inquire through body language : ) Is there anyone watching you ? Then they turn away . Allah has turned their hearts away because they are the ones who lack understanding .
Surely a ( Glorious ) Messenger from amongst yourselves has come to you . Your suffering and distress ( becomes ) grievously heavy on him ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . ( O mankind , ) he is ardently desirous of your ( betterment and guidance . And ) he is most ( deeply ) clement and merciful to the believers .
If ( in spite of all these favours and blessings ) they ( still ) deviate , then say : Enough for me is Allah . There is no God but He . I have reposed my trust in Him alone and He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning ) . These are the Verses of the Book which is all wisdom .
Is it amazing for the people that We sent down Revelation to a ( perfect ) man from among themselves : Warn ( the disoriented and distracted ) people ( of Allahs torment ) and give glad tidings to the believers that there is high rank ( i . e . exalted status ) for them in the Presence of their Lord . ? The disbelievers said : Indeed this person is an evident magician .
Certainly , your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth ( the upper and lower strata of the universe ) in six days ( i . e . aeons or phases , step by step ) . Then He settled Himself on the Throne ( befitting His Glory with His supreme authority , i . e . after the creation of the universe He established His Command and Control by enforcing His law and system in all the worlds and heavenly bodies ) . He is the One Who devises strategies for all operations ( i . e . makes everything function under a system ) . There is no one to intercede ( with Him ) without His permission . ( The Glorious and Mighty ) Allah is the One Who is your Lord ; worship Him alone . So , do you not think over ( accepting His Direction and Guidance ) ?
( O people ! ) It is to Him that you all are to return ; ( that ) is Allahs true promise . Surely He is the One Who originates the creation . Then He is the One Who will repeat it so that He rewards with justice those who believe and do righteous works . And those who reject faith and disbelieve , there is for them scalding water to drink and painful torment , a reward for their disbelief .
He is the One Who has made the sun ( a source of ) light and ( with that ) made the moon shine , and appointed for it stages ( to appear smaller or bigger ) so that you might compute the number of years and the count ( of time ) . Allah has not created ( all this ) but with a zero - defect strategy . ( Through these cosmic realities ) He expounds in detail the Signs ( of His Creativity , Unicity and Might ) for those who possess knowledge .
Surely in the alternation of night and day and in ( all ) that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth there are ( in like manner ) Signs for those who live by Godwariness .
Verily those who do not expect to meet Us and are pleased with the worldly life and are well contented with it and who are neglectful of Our Signs .
It is they whose abode is Hell , a recompense for the deeds they used to earn .
Indeed those who believe and practise piety consistently , their Lord will take them , for their faith , ( to the Gardens ) with streams flowing ( under their abodes , located ) in the Gardens of Bliss in the Hereafter .
( Finding these blessings and bounties , ) they will pray in these ( Gardens ) : Holy You are , O Allah ! and the word of their mutual greetings will be : Peace . ( Or the word for their reception from Allah and the angels will be : Peace . ) And their supplication will end ( with these words ) : All praise belongs to Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
If Allah were to hasten evil ( i . e . torment ) for the ( disbelieving ) people , as they make haste for the worldly gains , then certainly their term ( of life ) would have been ( hastily ) completed for them ( so that they reach Hell fast after dying ) . But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us in their rebellion ( and revolt ) so that they keep wandering disoriented .
And when a misery touches ( such a ) man , he calls out to Us while lying on his side or sitting or standing . But when We remove from him his affliction , he passes on ( forgetting Us ) as if he ( never ) called out to Us in pain that had touched him . This is how the ( wrong ) deeds which the transgressors do are made to appear to them fascinating .
And indeed before you ( also ) We destroyed ( a number of ) communities when they perpetrated injustice . And their Messengers brought to them clear Signs but they would not believe . That is how We punish the evildoers ( for their impious behaviour ) .
Then , after them , We made you ( their ) successors in the land so that We might observe how you would behave ( now ) .
And when Our enlightening Revelations are recited to them , those who do not believe in meeting Us say : Bring us a Quran different from this one or alter it . ( O Glorious Messenger , ) say : I have no right to modify it of my own accord . I follow only ( that ) which is revealed to me . I indeed fear the chastisement of the Mighty Day if I go against my Lord .
Say : Had Allah so willed , I would not have recited this ( Quran ) to you , nor would He ( Himself ) have made it known to you . I have indeed spent a ( part of ) life among you ( even ) before this ( revelation of the Quran ) . So do you not understand ?
So who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against Allah or belies His Revelations ? Certainly the evildoers will never triumph .
And ( the idolaters ) worship , apart from Allah , those ( idols ) which can neither harm nor benefit them and ( in justification of their false worship ) they say : These ( idols ) are our intercessors with Allah . Say : Do you seek to inform Allah of the ( fabricated ) presumption ( of intercession by idols ) whose ( existence ) He is not aware of either in the heavens or on in the earth ( i . e . intercession with Him by any idol is not in His knowledge ) ? Holy is He and Exalted far above those whom they set up as ( His ) peers .
And the entire mankind was one Umma ( [ Community ] in the beginning ) . Then they ( differed among themselves and ) disintegrated . And if it had not been decreed by your Lord ( that the torment would not be hastened ) , the matters would have been settled between them in which they disagree .
And ( now ) they say ( because of the same respite ) : Why has some ( decisive ) Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : The unseen is for Allah alone . So wait . I too am with you among those who wait .
And when We make the people relish ( Our ) Mercy after they are afflicted with distress , their plotting immediately begins against Our Signs ( consigning Our Favour to oblivion ) . Say : Allah is Swift to punish intrigues . Surely the angels We have sent keep writing whatever plots you contrive .
He is the One Who ( enables ) you to travel through land and sea , until when you board the vessels , and they ( the vessels ) carrying the passengers sail with the favourable wind , they rejoice over it . But ( all of a sudden ) a violent wind overtakes them ( the vessels ) , and ( the mounting ) waves surge ( towards ) those ( aboard ) from all sides . And they start thinking that they are ( now ) besieged by them ( the waves . At that time ) they call out to Allah ( with the mind ) that they sincerely devote their Din ( Religion ) to Him alone ( and submit : O Allah , ) if You deliver us from this ( monstrous torment , ) we shall certainly become among ( Your ) grateful servants .
But when Allah delivers them , they take no time to go unjustly rebellious in the land ( as before ) . O people ( rebelling against Allah ! The havoc caused by ) your rebellion and revolt is directed only towards your own souls . ( You may gain ) some benefit of the worldly life but ultimately you have to return to Us . Then We will make you well aware ( of your works ) that you have been doing .
The example of the worldly life is like water which We sent down from the sky . Then owing to this there came forth from the earth thick growth of vegetation which both men and cattle feed on , until when the earth took its ( full ) bloom and beauty and became fully embellished , and its inhabitants thought that ( now ) they had full control over it , then ( emergently ) Our command ( of torment ) seized it by night or by day and We made it mown down ( the way ) as if it did not even exist the day before . That is how We elucidate Our Signs to those who apply reason .
And Allah calls towards the Home of Peace ( Paradise ) , and guides whom He wills to the straight path .
For those who do pious works there is good recompense rather more ( added to it ) . And neither ( dust and ) darkness nor humiliation and disgrace will cover their faces . It is they who are the people of Paradise , its permanent residents .
And those who have earned evil , the recompense of evil ( for them ) will be a matching evil and humiliation and ignominy will spread over them . There will be no one to rescue them from ( the torment of ) Allah . ( It will appear ) as if their faces have been covered by dark patches of night . It is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents .
And the Day when We gather them all together , We shall say to the polytheists : Remain at your respective places , you and your partners ( false gods ) . Then We shall disunite them and their ( sculptured ) partners will say ( to them ) : It was not we that you used to worship .
So , sufficient is Allah as witness between us and you , for we were ( certainly ) unaware of your worship .
At that ( horrifying ) stage everyone will assess ( the reality of the works ) which he sent forward , and they will be returned to Allah , Who is their Real Master , and that fabrication of lies that they used to practise will vanish from them .
Say ( to them ) : Who provides you with sustenance from the heaven and the earth ( i . e . from above and beneath ) ? Or Who is the master of your ears and eyes ( i . e . hearing and sight ) ? And Who brings forth the living from the dead ( i . e . animate from inanimate ) and Who brings forth the dead from the living ( i . e . inanimate from animate ) ? And Who manages ( all the cosmic systems ) ? They will promptly say : Allah . Then say : So do you not fear ( Him ) ?
So ( the Lord of Glory and Might ) Allah alone is your true Lord . So what else can there be apart from ( this ) Truth except going astray ? Then , distracted , where are you being turned away ?
That is how the judgment of your Lord is proved true against the defiant that they will not believe .
Inquire ( of them ) : Is there any of your ( so - called ) partner - gods that originates creation , then restores it ( after total annihilation of life ) ? Say : Allah alone initiates creation ( bringing life into existence from nonentity ) , then He is the One Who will repeat it ( as well ) . So where are you wandering disoriented ?
Inquire ( of them ) : Is there any of your ( so - called ) partner - gods that may lead to the Truth ? Say : Allah alone guides to the Truth ( Din [ Religion ] ) . Then who has greater right to be obeyed He who guides to the Truth or he who himself does not find the way unless he is shown the way ? ( i . e . it should be carried from one place to the other as the disbelievers used to carry their idols as and when required . ) So what has gone wrong with you ? How do you decide ?
Most of them follow only conjecture . Surely , conjecture cannot in the least substitute the Truth . Assuredly , Allah knows best what they do .
This Quran is not such as could be devised without ( the Revelation of ) Allah . Rather ( it ) validates those ( Books ) which have been ( revealed ) before it , and is an exposition of whatever ( Allah ) has written ( on the Tablet or in the Commandments of Sharia ) . There is not even an iota of doubt in its ( trueness ) . It is from the Lord of all the worlds .
Do they say : The Messenger has fabricated it himself ? Say : Then bring forth any ( one ) Sura like it , and call on ( for your help ) all you can besides Allah , if you are truthful .
The truth is that they are denying that ( Word of Allah ) whose knowledge they failed to encompass , and its truth had ( also ) not yet manifested before them vividly . Those who have passed before them also denied ( the Truth ) the same way . So see how the wrongdoers met their fate !
Among them there is someone who will believe in it and some other who will not believe in it . And your Lord knows them full well who rouse mischief .
And if they belie you , then say : For me is my work and for you is your work . You are not accountable for what I do , and I am not accountable for what you do .
And there are some among them who ( apparently ) lend you their ears , but will you make the deaf hear even though they do not have a little capability to understand ?
There are some among them who ( apparently ) look towards you . Will you make the blind see the path even though they have no sight ?
Surely Allah does not do injustice to the people in the least , but they ( themselves ) do injustice to their souls .
And the Day when He gathers them ( they will feel ) as if they had not stayed in the world but for an hour of the day . They will recognize each other . Losers indeed are those who denied the meeting with Allah , and they were not the rightly guided .
And whether We show you ( in the world ) some portion of that ( torment ) which We promise them ( and We shall execute it during your holy lifetime , ) or We make you depart this life ( before that ) , they ( in any case ) are to return to Us . Then Allah ( Himself ) is witness to what they are doing .
And there has been coming one Messenger for every Umma ( Community ) . So , when their Messenger came ( with clear Signs , but even then they did not believe , ) then judgment was made among them with justice ( and exactly the same will happen on the Last Day ) . They will not be wronged .
And they say ( sarcastically ) : When will this promise ( of torment ) be ( fulfilled ? Tell us , O Muslims , ) if you are truthful .
Say : I am no master of any loss or profit for my own self except what Allah may will . A term is ( appointed ) for every Umma ( Community ) . When their ( appointed ) term comes , they can neither stay behind nor advance by a single moment .
Say : ( O disbelievers , ) just ponder : if His ( torment ) comes upon you ( all of a sudden ) by night or by day ( then what will you opt to do ) ? What is it that the evildoers want in haste ?
Will you believe in it when this ( torment ) will have befallen ? ( Then it will be said to you : You believe ) now ! ( Now it is of no avail ) while you ( sarcastically ) desired the same ( torment ) in haste .
Then it will be said to ( these ) wrongdoers : Taste the everlasting punishment . You will not be recompensed ( anything more ) but for the same ( deeds ) that you used to earn .
And they ask you : Is that matter of ( everlasting torment certainly ) true ? Say : Yes , by my Lord , it is certainly an absolute truth and you cannot frustrate ( Allahs plan by your denial ) .
If every evildoer possessed ( all ) that ( wealth ) which is in the earth , he would certainly offer it as ransom ( to get rid of ) the torment . ( But even then he will not be able to escape from the torment . ) And when ( such people ) see the torment , they will conceal their remorse . And judgment will be made among them with justice and they will not be wronged .
Know ! Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . Beware ! Indeed the promise of Allah is true but most of them do not know .
He is the One Who gives life and causes death and you will be returned to Him alone .
O mankind ! Surely , there has come to you an admonition from your Lord and a cure for all those ( diseases ) which are ( hidden ) in the breasts . And it is guidance and mercy ( too ) for those who are blessed with faith .
Say : ( All this ) is due to the Bounty and Mercy of Allah ( bestowed upon you through raising Muhammad [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] as the Holy Messenger ) . So the Muslims should rejoice over it . This is far better than ( all that affluence and wealth ) that they amass .
Say : Give your view : Allah sent down for you ( pure and clean ) provision , but you declared some of those ( things ) unlawful and ( others ) lawful . Say : Did Allah accord you ( its ) permission ? Or are you fabricating a lie against Allah ?
And what do those who fabricate lies against Allah think about the Day of Resurrection ? Truly Allah is Most Gracious to the people , but most of them are not thankful .
And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) in whatever state you may be and whatever portion you may recite from the Quran , and , ( O Umma [ Community ] of Muhammad , [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) whatever work you do , We witness and watch over you ( at the time ) when you are engaged in it . And not even the smallest particle in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from ( the knowledge of ) your Lord , And nor anything smaller or bigger than that ( smallest particle ) is there but ( recorded ) in the Clear Book ( the Protected Tablet , [ al - Lawhal - Mahfuz ] ) .
Beware ! Verily , the friends of Allah will not have any fear , nor will they grieve .
( They ) are the people who believe and ( always ) remain Godfearing , committed to piety .
There is for them the good news ( of honour and recognition ) in the life of the world , and ( also of forgiveness and intercession ) in the Hereafter . ( Or there are blessed spiritual visions in this world in the form of pious dreams , and in the Hereafter in the shape of effulgent disclosures of Allahs Absolute Beauty and Sight . ) The Commands of Allah never change . That is the colossal achievement .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Let not their ( hostile and malicious ) conversation grieve you . Surely all Grandeur and Authority belongs to Allah alone ( Who bestows upon whom He wills anything He may please ) . He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Remember ! To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And those who worship ( idols ) besides Allah do not ( in fact ) follow ( even ) their ( own sculptured ) associate - gods . They follow but only ( their own ) assumption and conjecture , and they indulge in merely wrong guesswork .
He is the One Who has made the night for you so that you may rest and relax therein , and made the day bright ( so that therein you may do your work ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who listen ( attentively ) .
They say : Allah has adopted a son ( for Himself , whereas ) He is Holy . He is Self - Sufficient . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all belongs to Him alone . You have no evidence with you of this ( false allegation ) . Do you attribute that ( thing ) to Allah which you ( yourselves ) do not know ?
Say : Surely those who fabricate lies against Allah shall not prosper .
There is ( but a few days ) enjoyment in this world . Then they are to return to Us . We shall then afflict them with severe torment as recompense for their disbelief .
And relate to them the account of Nuh ( Noah ) when he said to his people : O my people ( the children of Qabil [ Cain ] ) , if my stay and my admonition to you by Allahs Revelations annoy you , then ( bear in mind that ) I have put my trust in Allah alone ( and I am not afraid of you ) . Therefore , mature your plot ( against me ) jointly , and also ( make ) your ( sculptured ) partner - gods ( join in and think hard so that no aspect of ) your plot remains obscure to you ; then do ( whatever you feel like ) against me and do not give me any respite .
So if you have turned away ( from my admonition ) then I have not asked for any reward from you . My reward is only with ( the bountiful obligation of ) Allah , and I have been enjoined to observe perfect obedience and total submission ( to His Command ) .
Then his people belied him so We delivered him and those who were with him in the Ark ( from the torment of Deluge ) , and We made them successors ( in the land ) , and drowned those who denied Our Revelations . So , see how those who were warned met their fate !
Then ( how many a ) Messenger We sent after him towards their respective peoples ! They brought them clear Signs , but those people ( too ) did not prove such as would believe in that ( matter ) which they had already denied . That is how We seal the hearts of those who defy .
Then , after them , We sent Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs . But they displayed arrogance and they were people given to crimes .
So when the Truth came to them from Us , they said : Certainly this is clear sorcery .
Musa ( Moses ) said : Do you utter ( such remarks ) about the Truth when it has come to you ? ( Apply your reason and use vision and see ) if it is sorcery . And the sorcerers will never be able to prosper .
They said : ( O Musa [ Moses ] , ) have you come to us to turn us away from that ( way of life ) which we found our fathers ( following ) , and that the upper hand of you both should remain ( intact ) in the land ( of Egypt ) ? We are not the ones who will ever believe in you both .
And Pharaoh said : Bring to me every expert sorcerer .
So , when the magicians arrived , Musa ( Moses ) said to them : Throw ( all those things on the ground ) which you want to throw .
When they threw ( their strings and sticks ) , Musa ( Moses ) said : Whatever you have brought ( here ) is magic . Allah will surely prove it false right now . Certainly Allah does not set right the work of the mischief - mongers .
And Allah establishes the Truth by His Words , even though the evildoers continue to dislike it .
But except for a few youths from his people ( none ) believed in Musa ( Moses ) , owing to the fear of Pharaoh and their ( tribal ) chiefs and ( nobles ) , lest they should afflict them with ( some ) misery . And Pharaoh was indeed a tyrant in the land ( of Egypt ) and a transgressor . And certainly he was amongst those who exceed limits ( in oppression ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O my people , if you have believed in Allah , then put your trust in Him alone if you are ( truly ) the believers .
They submitted : We have put trust in Allah alone . O our Lord , make us not a victim of the oppressors injustice .
And deliver us with Your Mercy from ( the dominance of ) the disbelieving people .
And We sent Revelation to Musa ( Moses ) and his brother : Prepare some houses for your people in ( the city of ) Egypt , and build these ( houses ) facing the Qibla ( direction for offering Prayer ) , and ( then ) establish Prayer and give the believers a glad tidings ( of victory and help ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O our Lord , surely You have provided Pharaoh and his chiefs with the means of embellishment and ( abundance of ) riches and wealth in the life of the world . O our Lord , ( have You given them all this ) in order that they turn ( the people ) away from Your path ( sometime by tempting and sometime by terrifying them ) ? O our Lord , destroy their riches and make their hearts ( so ) callous that they may not believe even then , until they see the grievous torment .
( Allah ) said : The prayer of you both has indeed been granted . So remain steadfast both of you and follow not the path of those who do not possess knowledge .
And We took the Children of Israel across the sea . Pharaoh and his army chased them with rebellion , tyranny and oppression until when he ( Pharaoh ) was seized by drowning , he said : I believe that there is no god to be worshipped apart from ( God ) the Children of Israel have put faith in and I am ( now ) of the Muslims .
( Allah said : ) Now ( you believe ) while you have been ( persistently ) disobeying and defying before , and you were of those who spread disruption .
( O Pharaoh ! ) We shall today preserve your ( lifeless ) body so that you may become a Sign ( of warning ) for those who come after you . Indeed most of the people are neglectful ( in understanding ) Our Signs .
And We indeed provided the Children of Israel with a worthy place to dwell in and with pure and clean sustenance . They did not differ in anything , until knowledge and insight reached them . Your Lord will surely judge among them on the Day of Resurrection in matters wherein they used to differ .
( O listener ! ) If you have even a little doubt about this ( Book ) which We have revealed to you ( through Our Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , then inquire ( about its authenticity ) of those who have been reading the Book ( of Allah ) before you . The Truth has no doubt come to you from your Lord , so be not at all of those who doubt .
And never be of those who deny the Revelations of Allah lest you should become of the losers .
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) Indeed those against whom the judgment of your Lord has proved true will not believe .
Even though all Signs should come to them so much so that they see the painful torment ( as well ) .
Then why has there not been any town , except ( the town of ) the people of Yunus ( Jonah ) , that believed and its belief brought it profit ? When ( the people of Yunus [ Jonah ] ) believed ( just seeing the sign of torment before it was sent down ) , We removed from them the punishment of humiliation ( even ) in the life of the world and We let them avail the profit for a time .
And had Allah so willed , certainly all inhabitants on the earth would have believed . ( When your Lord has not made them believe by force , ) will you coerce the people until they become believers ?
And no soul has the capability to believe ( on its own ) without Allahs leave . He ( Allah ) places the impurity of disbelief on those who do not put their reason to work ( to grasp the truth ) .
Say : ( Just ) observe what Signs of Allahs Might are there in ( the boundless cosmos of ) the heavens and the earth . ( These ) Signs and ( the Messengers ) who warn the people ( of Allahs torment ) cannot benefit those who have no intension to believe .
Are they waiting for ( the bad days ) similar to those of the people who have passed away before them ? Say : Wait ( then ) ; I am ( also ) with you among those who wait .
We then save Our Messengers and also those who believe in the same manner . This ( provision ) is a bountiful obligation upon Us to save the believers .
Say : O people , if you are in any doubt ( about the authenticity of ) my Din [ Religion ] , then ( listen ) that I cannot worship those ( idols ) whom you worship besides Allah . But I worship that Allah Who causes you to die . And I have been commanded that I must ( always ) be from among the believers .
And that , guarding against every falsehood , ( with focused attention , ) keep your direction towards Din ( Religion ) and never be of those who associate partners with Allah .
( This Command is being communicated to Umma [ Community ] through the Messenger : ) Nor worship those ( idols ) besides Allah which can neither profit nor harm you . Then if you do it , you will surely be among the wrongdoers the same moment .
And if Allah afflicts you with some distress , then there is none who can remove it but He . And if He intends any good for you , then there is none who can repel His Bounty . He bestows His Bounty upon whomsoever of His servants He pleases . And He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : O people , surely the Truth has come to you from your Lord . So whoever adopts the path of guidance , adopts it for his own good , and he who is misguided , goes astray for his own destruction . And I am not a custodian over you ( that I should bring you to the path of guidance coercively ) .
( O Messenger ! ) Follow the same that is revealed to you , and be steadfast until Allah gives His Judgment , and He is the Best of the judges .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . This ) is ( that ) Book whose Verses are firmly founded ; then they have been explained in detail by ( the Lord ) Who is All - Wise , All - Aware .
That do not worship anyone but Allah . Verily , I am a Warner from Him ( Allah ) to you and a Bearer of glad tidings .
And that you should seek forgiveness from your Lord , then submit your repentance before Him ( with true heart ) . He will keep you glad and gratified with an excellent provision till an appointed term , and will reward for merit everyone enjoying merit ( i . e . will bestow reward and ranks corresponding to ones amount of righteous deeds and dedicated services ) . And if you turn away , then I fear for you the torment of a Mighty Day .
You are to return to Allah and He has Mighty Control over everything .
Bear in mind ! These ( disbelievers ) fold up their breasts so that they may hide ( the state of their hearts ) from Him ( Allah ) . Beware ! When they cover ( their bodies ) with their clothes ( even then ) He knows all those matters which they hide and which they lay open . Surely , He knows best ( the secrets of ) the hearts .
And there is no moving creature ( living being ) on the earth but ( that ) its sustenance is ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Allah . And He knows its resting - place and ( also ) the place where it is to be entrusted . Everything is ( recorded ) in the enlightening Book ( the Protected Tablet - [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And He ( Allah ) is the One Who created the heavens and the earth ( the higher and the lower strata of the universe ) in six days ( i . e . six phases or aeons of creation and evolution ) . And ( before the creation of the earth ) His Throne of Authority operated on water , ( and from that He brought forth all manifestations of life and created you , ) so that He might put you to trial to evaluate which of you would prove better conduct - wise . And if you say : You will be raised ( brought to life ) after death , the disbelievers will certainly say : This is nothing ( else ) but an obvious magic .
And if We defer their torment for a few fixed days , they will definitely say : What has held it back ? Beware ! The day when that ( torment ) comes upon them ( then ) that will not be averted from them , and that ( chastisement ) will beset them which they used to make fun of .
And if We make man taste Mercy from Us , then withdraw it from him ( for some reason ) , he becomes highly disappointed ( and ) ungrateful .
And if We make him taste ( some ) favour after the suffering that afflicted him , then he is sure to say : Gone are all my troubles . Surely , he ( becomes ) most exultant and boastful .
Except for those who remain steadfast and keep doing pious deeds . For them is forgiveness and great reward .
How may it be that you omit a portion of what has been revealed to you , and that your ( sanctified ) breast feels straitened ( by the idea that ) the disbelievers say : Why has any treasure not been sent down to him ( the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) or why has any angel not come with him ? ( O Glorious Messenger ! That is just impossible . ) You are but a Warner . ( You are neither to tempt someone nor to persecute . ) And Allah is a Guardian over everything .
Do the disbelievers say : The Messenger has fabricated this ( Quran ) himself ? Say : Bring then ten forged chapters like this , and call ( to your help ) whom you can except Allah if you are truthful .
( O Muslims ! ) So , if they do not accept your challenge , then firmly believe that the Quran has been revealed with Allahs knowledge , and that there is no other God but He . So , will you ( now ) stick to Islam ( firm - footed ) ?
Those who lust after the worldly life ( only , ) with its beauty ( and embellishment ) , We pay them back in full for their works here in this world and their ( worldly recompense ) is not diminished in the least .
They are the people for whom there is no ( share ) in the Hereafter except the Fire ( of Hell ) . And ( as for reward in the Hereafter ) all ( the works ) they did in the world have come to nothing , and ( all that ) they used to do is null and void ( because their account is cleared by paying them in full measure in the life of the world , and nothing remains in balance for the Hereafter ) .
He who holds fast to the Clear Proof from his Lord and a testimony ( the Quran ) too has come from his Lord for his strength and support , and prior to that the Book of Musa ( [ Moses ] the Torah ) , a guide and mercy ( too had come ) so , it is they who believe in it ( the Quran ) . Can ( he be equal to ) the one who denies ( the Quran ) from among ( the disbelieving ) sects while his abode is the Fire of Hell ? So , ( O listener ! ) be not in any doubt about it . Surely , this ( Quran ) is the Truth from your Lord , but most people do not believe .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah ? Such people will be brought before their Lord and the witnesses will say : These are the ones who foisted a lie upon their Lord . Know that Allahs curse is upon the wrongdoers
Those who hinder ( others ) from the path of Allah and look for crookedness in it . And it is they who deny the Hereafter .
They have no capability at all to frustrate ( Allah ) on earth , nor are there any helpers for them apart from Allah . The torment will be doubled for them ( because ) they had neither courage to hear ( the Truth ) nor vision to see ( the Truth ) .
It is they who ruined their souls , and the lies they used to invent are ( all ) gone from them .
This is absolutely true that it is certainly they who will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter .
Verily those who believe and persist in pious works and humble themselves before their Lord , it is they who are the people of Paradise . They will live there forever .
The example of the two parties ( the disbelievers and the believers ) is like the blind and the deaf ( versus ) the seeing and the hearing . Are both the cases equal ? Will you not take advice ( even ) then ?
And surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) ) to his people . ( He said to them : ) I am ( raised and appointed as ) a plain Warner to you .
That you worship none but Allah . I fear the torment of a grievous day ( coming ) upon you .
So the disbelieving chiefs and nobles of his people said : You appear to us but a human like ourselves , and we have not seen any ( honourable person ) following you except the most inferior and lowest of ( our society ) having superficial opinion ( who have become your followers without using discretion ) . Nor do we find in you any merit and superiority over us ( i . e . power and authority , wealth and riches or the worthy people joining your party or for that matter , any such prominent feature ) . Instead , we consider you to be liars .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : O my people , what is your view : if I stick to a Clear Proof from my Lord and He has also granted me His ( exceptional ) Mercy from Himself but that has been veiled from you ( like the blind ) , can we force it upon you coercively while you despise it ?
And , O my people , I do not ( also ) demand from you any wealth for ( promoting and preaching this message ) . My reward is only ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Allah . Nor shall I drive away ( for your sake ) these ( poor and backward ) people who have accepted faith . ( Do not consider them inferior . It is they who are in fact superior and respectable . ) Surely they are those who will be blessed with meeting with their Lord , and truly I find you an ignorant ( and insensible ) people .
And , O my people , if I drive them away then who will come to my help ( to rescue me ) from ( the wrath of ) Allah ? Do you not reflect ?
And I do not say ( this ) to you : I have treasures of Allah ( i . e . I am a very rich person ) ; nor do I know of the unseen on my own ( without Allahs Revelation ) . Nor do I say : I am an angel ( not a man . My message is not based on charismatic claims ) . Nor do I say pertaining to those who are inferior in your eyes : Allah will not award them any good at all ( that is Allahs command and everyones share ) . Allah knows best what is in their hearts . ( If I were to say that , ) surely I shall be among the wrongdoers the same moment .
They said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , indeed you have disputed with us and disputed much . So now bring upon us that ( torment ) which you promise us if you are ( really ) truthful .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : Allah alone will bring upon you that ( torment ) if He so wills and you cannot hinder ( Him ) .
And even if I resolve to counsel you , my counsel ( too ) will not benefit you if Allah wills to lead you astray . He is your Lord and you will be returned to Him alone .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Do they say : The Messenger has fabricated this ( Quran ) himself ? Say : If I have fabricated it , then I shall have to bear ( the resulting torment of ) my sin . And I am free of the sin that you are perpetrating .
And it was revealed to Nuh ( Noah ) : None of your people will ( now ) believe ( any more ) except those who have ( so far ) believed . So you should not grieve over their ( belying and mocking ) activities .
And build an Ark before Our Eyes in compliance with Our instructions , and do not converse with Me ( about anything ) pertaining to the wrongdoers . They will surely be drowned .
And Nuh ( Noah ) set himself to building the Ark . And whenever the chiefs of his people passed by him , they would scoff at him . Nuh ( Noah ) would say ( in reply ) : If you are mocking us ( today ) , we shall also mock you ( tomorrow ) as you are mocking us .
So you will soon learn upon whom comes ( in this very world the torment ) that will disgrace and humiliate him and ( then whom ) the torment that will last forever befalls ( in the Hereafter too ) .
Until when Our Command ( of torment ) came and the oven started gushing ( like fountains , then ) We said : ( O Nuh [ Noah ] , ) get aboard the Ark a pair of animals ( male and female ) of every species and ( take in ) your family also except those against whom the Command ( of destruction ) has already gone forth , and whoever has believed ( take him also with you ) . And , except a few , none had believed with him .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : Get into the Ark ; in the Name of Allah will it sail and anchor . Surely my Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And the Ark kept sailing , carrying them through ( violent ) waves towering like mountains . Then Nuh ( Noah ) called out to his son , who had separated from him ( and was standing with the disbelievers ) : O my son , get aboard with us and do not stay with the disbelievers .
He said : ( Instead of embarking on the Ark ) I shall just now take shelter on some mountain . That will save me from the Deluge . Nuh ( Noah ) said : None can save today from Allahs punishment except someone to whom He ( Allah ) shows His Mercy . In the meanwhile , a ( violent ) wave came between both ( father and son ) . So he was one of the drowned .
( And when all were drowned and annihilated except Nuhs [ Noahs ] Ark ) it was commanded : O earth , swallow up your water and , O sky , cease pouring . And the water was dried and the Command was executed and the Ark came to rest on Mount al - Judi and it was said : Far away are the unjust ( from Mercy ) !
And Nuh ( Noah ) called out to his Lord and submitted : O my Lord , indeed my son ( too ) was a part of my family and certainly Your promise is true , and You are the Greatest of all rulers .
( Allah ) said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , indeed he is not included in your family because his actions were not righteous . So do not ask Me a question ( about matters ) of which you have no knowledge . I admonish you lest you should become amongst the unwise .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord , I seek refuge with You from asking You that of which I have no knowledge . And if You forgive me not and bestow ( not ) mercy on me ( then ) I shall be of the losers .
He was commanded : O Nuh ( Noah ) , get down ( from the Ark ) with peace and blessings from Us on you and on the ( kingdoms , classes and ) species that are with you . And there will ( also ) be ( classes and ) species ( in future again ) whom We shall provide with ( the worldly favours ) ; then a painful torment will come upon them from Us .
This ( narration ) is of the accounts of the unseen that We reveal to you . Neither you nor your people knew them before this . So observe patience . Surely it is the Godfearing with whom it ends well .
And to the people of Ad ( We sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Hud . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God other than Him . You merely invent a lie against Allah ( of having a partner ) .
O my people ! I do not demand of you any recompense for this ( promotion and preaching of the message ) . My reward is ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Him Who has created me . Do you not apply your mind ?
And , O people , seek forgiveness of your Lord ( for your sins ) , then turn towards Him ( with true hearts ) . He will send upon you copious downpour from the sky and will add strength to your strength . So , do not turn away from Him becoming sinners .
They said : O Hud , you have not brought us any clear proof . Nor are we going to forsake our gods at your behest and nor are we to believe in you .
We can say nothing except that some of our gods have afflicted you with ( mental ) disorder . Hud said : Indeed I call Allah to witness , and you too bear witness that I have no concern with those whom you associate as partners with Allah .
Except for Him ( Allah ) , join in to hatch ( some ) plot against me all of you ( including your false gods ) , then grant me no respite ( as well ) .
Surely I have put my trust in Allah Who is my Lord ( as well as ) your Lord . And there is not a moving ( living ) creature but He holds it by its forelock ( i . e . is completely in the grip of His Mighty Control ) . Surely my Lord is ( found by treading ) the straight road ( of truth and justice ) .
If even then you turn away then I have literally brought you ( all those Commandments ) with which I have been sent to you . And my Lord will appoint some other people in your place as your successors , and you can do Him no harm at all . Surely my Lord is Protector of everything .
And when Our Command ( of torment ) came to pass ( then ) We saved Hud and the believers with him because of Our Mercy , and We delivered them from severe punishment .
And these are ( the people of ) Ad who denied the Revelations of their Lord and disobeyed their Messengers and followed the dictates of every oppressive ( and arrogant ) enemy of the Truth .
A curse was set to chase them in this world , and ( will chase them ) on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) . Bear in mind that ( the people of ) Ad denied their Lord . Beware ! Far away ( from Mercy ) are the Ad , the people of Hud !
And ( We sent ) to ( the people of ) Thamud their ( kinship ) brother Salih . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God apart from Him . He is the One Who raised you up from the earth and settled you therein . So , beg His forgiveness and then turn to Him in repentance . Surely my Lord is Near , Granting prayers .
They said : O Salih , only you have been the centre of hopes among our people before this . Are you forbidding us to worship those ( idols ) which our forefathers used to worship ? We are really caught in a disquieting doubt about ( the Oneness of Allah ) towards which you are calling us .
Salih said : O my people , just think if I cling to the clear proof from my Lord , and I have been blessed with a ( special ) Mercy from Him ( then after that ) if I disobey Him ( by holding back His Commandments from you ) , then who can help me escape from ( the torment of ) Allah ? So , you can add to me nothing except inflicting loss .
And , O my people , this is a ( peculiarly created ) she - camel of Allah ( which ) is a Sign for you . So leave her free to graze in Allahs earth and do her no harm lest an imminent torment should seize you .
Then they ( hamstrung and ) slaughtered her . Salih said : ( Now ) you luxuriate in your abodes ( only ) for three days . This is a promise which will ( never ) become untrue .
Then , when Our Command ( of torment ) came to pass , We saved Salih and the believers with him through Our Mercy and ( also delivered them ) from the humiliation of that day . Surely your Lord alone is Powerful , Sovereign .
And a dreadful Blast overtook the wrongdoers . So morning found them ( dead ) lying prone in their homes .
As if they had never dwelled there . Remember ! ( The people of ) Thamud denied their Lord . Beware ! Far away ( from Mercy ) are ( the people of ) Thamud .
And indeed Our deputed angels came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) bearing glad tidings . They greeted him , saying : Peace ( be on you ) , and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) reciprocated : Peace ( be on you ) . Then he did not take any time and brought ( them ) a roasted calf ( in hospitality ) .
Then , when ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) saw that their hands did not stretch towards that ( dish ) , he took them as strangers and felt a little fear of them in ( his ) heart . They said : Do not be afraid . We have been sent to the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
And his wife ( Sara ) who was standing ( beside ) laughed . So We conveyed to his ( wife ) the glad tidings of the birth of Ishaq ( Isaac ) and beyond Ishaq of Yaqub ( Jacob ) .
She said : Amazing ! Shall I bear a child while I have grown old and my husband ( too ) is an old man ? It is extremely astonishing indeed !
The angels said : Are you wondering at Allahs Command ? O people of the house , ( showered ) upon you are Mercy and Blessings of Allah . Indeed He ( is ) Praiseworthy , Glorious .
So when fear disappeared from Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the glad tidings reached him , he disputed ( with ) Our ( angels ) about the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
Assuredly Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was indeed most forbearing , sobbing and submissive and turning to Us under all circumstances .
( The angels said : ) O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , leave off this ( matter ) . Surely the Command of ( torment from ) your Lord has now come to pass , and the torment is about to seize them which cannot be averted .
And when Our deputed angels visited Lut ( Lot ) , he felt worried on their arrival and on account of them his strength sank and he said : This is a day of great distress . ( The angels were extremely handsome , and Lut ( Lot ) was aware of the evil habit of his people . So he was perturbed at the fear of possible mischief . )
( So the same happened that he apprehended . ) The people of Lut ( Lot , hearing about the arrival of the guests , ) came to him running . And they were already addicted to evil - doing . Lut ( Lot ) said : O my ( disobedient ) people , here are my ( peoples ) daughters . They are pure and lawful for you ( through marriage ) . So , fear Allah and do not humiliate me before my guests ( because of your indecency ) . Is there not among you even a single man of upright character ?
They said : You know it well that we have nothing to do with your ( peoples ) daughters . And you certainly know what we desire .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Would that I had the power to resist you or I could seek shelter ( today ) in some indomitable fort .
( Thereupon the angels ) said : O Lut ( Lot ) , we are the messengers of your Lord . These people shall never be able to get at you . So leave in a part of the night with your family and let not any of you look ( back ) ; but ( do not take ) your wife ( with you ) . The same ( torment ) which will come upon them is going to reach her ( too ) . Surely , the time appointed for their ( torment ) is the morning . And is the morning not near ?
Then , when Our command ( of chastisement ) came to pass , We turned the town upside down and We rained upon it stones and pebbles of baked clay which incessantly teemed down ( layer upon layer ) .
Which were marked by your Lord . And this ( torment of stones ) is not far away from the wrongdoers ( even now ) .
And We ( sent ) to ( the people of ) Madyan their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God but He . And do not give short measure and weight . Indeed I see you prosperous , but I fear for you the torment of a day which is about to encompass ( you ) .
And , O my people , give full measure and full weight with justice , and do not give people their things less than their due . And do not spread destruction in the land by becoming mischief - mongers .
That which is left over from Allahs provision ( only that ) is better for you if you have faith . And I am not a guardian over you .
They said : O Shuaib , does your Prayer only command you that we forsake those ( gods ) which our fathers have been worshipping , or that we refrain from doing with our wealth what we like ? Surely you ( alone ) must be the most tolerant and guided one !
Shuaib said : O my people , tell me if I adhere to the clear proof from my Lord and He has also granted me pure and fine means of living from His Presence , ( then why should I not preach the Truth ) ? I ( also ) do not want that , following you , I myself start doing ( against the Truth ) the same that I am forbidding you . All I desire is to ( reform ) you as far as I can , and my capability comes only from Allahs ( help ) . So I have put my trust in Him alone and I turn towards Him alone .
And , O my people , let not your enmity and hostility against me so incite you ( due to which ) there comes upon you that ( torment ) that befell the people of Nuh ( Noah ) , or the people of Hud , or the people of Salih . And ( the days of ) the people of Lut ( Lot ) have not anyway passed far before you .
And seek forgiveness from your Lord , then turn to Him in repentance ( with true hearts ) . Indeed my Lord is Ever - Merciful , Most Loving .
They said : O Shuaib , we do not understand most of your talks , and we know you as a weak person in society . And were it not for your family , we would stone you . ( This is what we are conceding for , otherwise ) you enjoy no respect in our eyes .
Shuaib said : O my people , is my family more venerable to you than Allah ? And you have ( as if ) cast Him ( Allah ) behind your backs . Surely , my Lord has encompassed ( all ) your works .
And , O my people , keep working in your place ; I am doing my work . Soon will you come to know whom that torment seizes which will humiliate him , and who it is that is a liar . And wait on and I ( too ) wait along with you .
And when Our command ( of torment ) came We saved Shuaib and the believers with him through Our Mercy but a dreadful Blast seized the wrongdoers . So they reached the morning ( as dead ) lying prostrate in their homes
As if they had never put up there . Listen ! ( The people of ) Madyan are doomed as were doomed ( the people of ) Thamud .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses , too ) with Our Signs and a clear proof .
To Pharaoh and his chiefs . The chiefs of the people obeyed the command of Pharaoh , although Pharaohs command was not right .
On the Day of Resurrection he will lead his people and will ultimately bring them down into the Fire of Hell . And how evil that place is to be ushered into !
The curse has been made to chase them in this world and ( this will chase them ) on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) . What an evil gift has been bestowed upon them !
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) That is some of the news We are relating to you of ( those ) towns some of which still exist and ( some ) were totally annihilated .
And We did not wrong them but they ( themselves ) wronged their souls . So , their false gods whom they worshipped besides Allah proved to them of no help when the command ( of torment ) of your Lord came forth . And those ( gods ) could add only to their destruction and devastation .
And that is how your Lord grips : He seizes the communities when they ( become ) tyrannous and corrupt . Surely His grip is agonizing and fierce .
Indeed these ( episodes ) contain lessons of warning for him who fears the chastisement of the Last Day . This ( Day of Rising ) is the Day when entire mankind will be gathered together and it is this Day when all will be made present .
And We are not deferring it but for an appointed term ( which has already been fixed ) .
When that Day comes , not a soul will be able to speak without His permission . Then some of them will be unfortunate and others fortunate .
So those who will be unfortunate will be ( put ) into Hell ; there they will be given to screaming and wailing .
They will abide in it till the heavens and the earth ( which will then exist ) last except as your Lord wills . Surely your Lord executes what He wills .
And those who will be fortunate will be in Paradise . They will abide in it forever till the heavens and the earth ( which will then exist ) endure except as your Lord wills . This is a bounty which will never be withdrawn .
So , ( O listener , ) do not have any doubt at all about those which they worship . They do not worship ( on the basis of any reason or insight ) , but ( they worship only ) as their ancestors have done contiguously before . And certainly We will pay them their full share ( of torment ) which will not be diminished in the least .
And indeed We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book . Then differences arose concerning it . And had there not been a decree from your Lord gone forth before , the judgment between them would surely have been passed . And they are certainly caught in a disquieting doubt about it ( the Quran ) .
Your Lord will doubtlessly pay them in full for their works . He is certainly Well Aware of whatever they are doing .
So remain firm - footed as you have been commanded , and he too ( must persevere ) who has turned ( to Allah ) in your companionship . And , ( O people , ) do not revolt . Indeed He monitors whatever you do .
And incline not towards those who are engaged in oppression ( and exploitation ) lest the Fire ( of Hell ) should touch down at you and there will be no protector for you apart from Allah ; then help ( too ) will not be extended to you .
And establish Prayer at the two ends of the day and in some parts of the night . Surely good actions delete the evil ones . This is admonition for those who accept admonition .
And be steadfast . Surely Allah does not let the reward of the pious go to waste .
So why were there not among the communities that preceded you men of superior morality and wisdom who would stop people from mischief - mongering in the land , except a few of them whom We delivered ? And the unjust stuck to ( the same path of ) luxury and lustfulness that they were addicted to . And they were ( regular ) criminals .
And your Lord is not such that He would destroy the towns wrongfully while their dwellers are pious .
And had your Lord so willed , He would have made mankind one Umma ( Community . But He has not done so by force . On the contrary He has given free choice to all to adopt a religion . ) And ( now ) these people will always hold divergent views .
Except for him on whom your Lord has bestowed His Mercy and that is what He has created them for . And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled : Surely I will fill Hell with all the ( disbelieving ) jinn and men .
And We are relating to you all the news of the Messengers whereby We strengthen your ( most purified ) heart . And in this ( chapter ) there has come to you the Truth and Advice and a lesson of warning ( and also a reminder ) for the believers .
And say to those who do not believe : Work on in your place and we are doing ( what our station demands ) .
And wait on ; we ( too ) are waiting .
And ( all ) the unseen of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone and He is the One towards Whom every act is returned . So keep worshipping Him and keep trust in Him alone . And your Lord is not unmindful of the deeds that all of you do .
Alif Lam Ra ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the illumining Book .
Verily , We have revealed it as Quran in the Arabic language so that you comprehend ( it directly ) .
( O Beloved ! ) We relate to you the best narrative by means of this Quran which We have revealed to you , though you were unaware ( of this story ) before this .
( It runs thus : ) When Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to his father : O my venerable father ! I have seen ( in a dream ) eleven stars and the sun and the moon . I have seen them prostrating themselves before me .
He said : O my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they should maneuver a plot against you . Surely , Satan is an open enemy to man .
In the same way your Lord will choose you ( for a divine station ) and will teach you how to infer conclusions ( i . e . the knowledge of the interpretation of dreams ) and will perfect His Favour upon you and the House of Yaqub ( Jacob ) as He perfected it upon your fathers ( grandfather and great grandfather ) Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) . Indeed your Lord is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Surely , there are ( many ) Signs ( in the parable of ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brothers for those who are inquisitive .
( Call to mind the time ) when the brothers of Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Certainly Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother are dearer to our father than we are whereas we are a stronger party ( comprising ten members ) . No doubt our father is lost into an evident ecstasy ( resulting from deep love for them ) .
( Now the only solution is : ) Kill Yusuf ( Joseph ) or banish him to some distant unknown place . ( Thus ) your fathers attention will be focused purely on you and after that become a band of righteous people ( by turning towards Allah in repentance ) .
A negotiator from among them said : Do not kill Yusuf ( Joseph ) and lower him down at the bottom of a dark deep well . Some traveller will pick him up and carry him away . ( So do this ) if ( at all ) you are up to ( something ) .
They said : O our father , what has happened to you that you do not trust us in the case of Yusuf ( Joseph ) while we are certainly his well - wishers ?
Send him with us tomorrow . He will eat lavishly and play and certainly we are his guards .
He said : This idea indeed makes me sad that you take him along and I am ( also ) afraid ( of this idea ) that some wolf may devour him while you are careless of his ( safeguard ) .
They said : If the wolf devours him while we , a strong party , too are ( present ) then we are as good as nothing .
Then , when they took him along and all agreed to throw him into some deep dark well , We revealed to him : ( O Yusuf [ Joseph ] , do not worry . A time will come when ) you will certainly remind them of this affair of theirs and they will not have the sense ( of your exalted station ) .
( Throwing Yusuf [ Joseph ] into the well ) they came to their father at night weeping ( deceptively ) .
They said : O our father , we went racing with one another and left Yusuf ( Joseph ) with our belongings . Then a wolf devoured him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
They produced Yusufs ( Josephs ) shirt smearing it ( also ) with false blood . ( Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) said : ( This is not the truth . ) But your ( jealous , ill - commanding ) selves have made ( a colossal ) task easy and pleasant - looking for you ( which you eventually did accomplish ) . So better it is to be steadfast ( over this tragedy ) , and I seek only Allahs help against whatever you are narrating .
And ( there ) came a caravan of travellers . They sent their water - drawer . So he lowered his bucket ( into that well ) and he exclaimed : Good news ! Here is a boy ! And they hid him regarding him a valuable trade item . And Allah knows well the activities they were busy doing .
And Yusufs ( Josephs ) brothers ( who had returned to the site showed him as their deserter servant and ) sold him ( to the same caravan ) for a low price - a few Dirhams - because the travellers were ( already ) disinterested in ( buying ) him ( Yusuf . Later , the travellers took him to Egypt where they sold him . )
And the man in Egypt who purchased him ( was Qatfir by name , the finance minister of the King of Egypt Riyan ibn Walid , commonly known as Aziz [ of Egypt ] ) said to his wife ( Zulaikha ) : Make him stay honourably . He may bring us profit or we may adopt him as a son . Thus We established Yusuf ( Joseph ) and strengthened his position in the land [ of Egypt ] so that We might teach him how to infer from the events ( i . e . the interpretation of dreams ) . And Allah is the Master of His work but most people do not know .
And when he reached his full manhood , We endowed him with the judgment ( of Prophethood ) and the knowledge ( of the interpretation of dreams ) . This is how We bless the pious with reward .
And the woman ( Zulaikha ) , in whose house he was putting up , sought intensely to seduce him and she bolted the doors ( as well ) and said : Come ! Make haste ! ( I ask you . ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : I seek Allahs refuge . Surely , he ( your husband ) is my master . He has kept me most honourably . Indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper .
( Yusuf [ Joseph ] refused ) but she ( Zulaikha ) had definitely made up her mind for him . And he too ( might ) have resolved had he not seen the Clear Sign of his Lord . It was ( made to happen ) like that ( in order that ) We keep away from him affliction and indecency both . Assuredly he was of Our chosen ( exalted ) servants .
And they both ran ( one behind the other ) towards the door and she ( Zulaikha ) tore his shirt from behind and both found her husband ( Aziz of Egypt ) at the door . She ( immediately ) said : What can be the punishment for him who intends to commit indecency with your wife except that he should be put in prison or ( he ) be given painful torment ?
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : ( No indeed ! In truth ) it was she herself who sought to seduce me for her purpose . And ( in the meanwhile ) one of her household ( who was an infant ) bore witness : If his shirt is torn from the front , then she has spoken the truth and he is of the liars .
But if his shirt is torn from behind then she is a liar and he is of the truthful .
Then , when he ( Aziz of Egypt ) saw his shirt and found it torn from behind , he said : This is the craft of you women . Certainly your women - craft is highly ( dangerous ) .
O Yusuf ( Joseph ) ! Ignore it and , ( O Zulaikha , ) ask forgiveness for your sin . Surely it is you who are of the sinful .
And some women of ( the elite class in ) the city began to say : The wife of Aziz seeks to seduce her slave - boy for her purpose . The love for him ( the slave ) has gone deep into her heart . We surely see her in manifest error .
So when she ( Zulaikha ) heard their deceitful talk , she sent for them and arranged a meeting for them . ( She placed fruit before them ) and gave each one of them a knife and requested ( Yusuf ) : Walk out before them ( so that they may realize the cause of my state of mind ) . So , when they glanced at Yusuf ( Joseph and ) saw ( his dazzling beauty ) , they began to exalt ( the charm of his ecstatic beauty ) and ( in a dazed state ) cut their hands ( instead of fruits served to them ) . And ( having seen him ) exclaimed ( spontaneously ) : God save us ! This is not a human being ; he must be some exalted angel ( i . e . an embodiment of light descending from the transcendent realm of divinity ) !
( Zulaikhas trick worked . ) She spoke ( at this juncture ) : It is this ( embodiment of light ) you have been reproaching me for . It is , no doubt , I myself who sought to seduce him ( under violent urge ) but he remained firmly upright and did not yield . And if ( even now ) he does not do what I ask him for , he will surely be put into prison and will certainly be disgraced .
( By now the elite Egyptian women too had agreed to Zulaikhas viewpoint . Hearing them , ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) submitted : O my Lord ! The prison is far dearer to me than what these women are inviting me to . And if You do not turn away their craft from me , I shall get inclined towards their ( words ) and shall become of the unwise .
So , his Lord granted him the prayer and removed the women - craft from him . Surely He is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Then even after seeing the signs of ( Yusufs [ Josephs ] decency and righteousness ) they deemed it appropriate to imprison him for a time ( so that the gossip of the episode among the people might die down ) .
And with him two young men also entered the prison . One of them said : I have seen myself ( in a dream ) pressing wine ( from grapes ) . And the other said : I have seen myself ( in a dream ) that I am carrying bread on my head , with birds picking at it . O Yusuf ( Joseph ) ! Tell us its interpretation . Surely , we see you one of the spirituality excellent .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : The food which is served to you ( daily ) will not have yet come to you when I shall inform both of you about its interpretation before its coming to you . This ( interpretation ) is of those branches of knowledge that my Lord has taught me . Verily , I have rejected ( from the very beginning ) the religion of the people who do not believe in Allah and they deny the Hereafter as well .
And I follow Din [ Religion ] of my father and forefathers : Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , and Yaqub ( Jacob ) . And we have no right to associate anything as a partner with Allah . This ( belief in the Oneness of Allah ) is a ( special ) bounty of Allah upon us and the people , but most people do not give thanks .
O my two companions of the prison ! ( Say : ) Are many separate gods better or One Allah , Who Dominates and Controls all ?
( In fact ) you worship none besides Allah except a few names which you and your forefathers have forged ( on your own ) . Allah has not sent down any authority for them . Judgment rests with Allah alone . He alone has commanded that worship none but Him . This is the straight path ( true Din [ Religion ] ) but most people do not know .
O my two companions of the prison ! ( The interpretation of the dream of ) one of you ( is that he ) will serve wine to his master ( the king ) , and as for the other , ( who has seen bread on his head , ) he will be crucified and then birds will pick at his head . The ( final ) judgment has been given about which you have asked .
And Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to the one whom he believed to be released : Mention me to your king ; ( he may thus recall that another innocent one is also lying in imprisonment ) . But Satan made him forget to mention ( him ) to his king and consequently Yusuf ( Joseph ) remained in prison for several years .
And ( one day ) the King said : I have seen ( in a dream ) seven fat cows whom seven lean cows are devouring and ( have seen ) seven green ears of corn and ( seven ) other dry . O courtiers ! Explain to me the implication of my dream if you know the interpretation of dreams .
They said : These are confused dreams and we do not know the interpretation of confused dreams .
And one of the two prisoners , who had been released and ( now ) after a long time remembered ( his promise to Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) , said : I shall tell you its interpretation ; so send me ( to Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) .
( Reaching the prison , he said : ) O Yusuf ( Joseph ) , the embodiment of truth , explain to us the interpretation ( of this dream ) that there are seven fat cows whom seven lean ones are devouring and there are seven green ears of corn and seven others which are dry , so that I may return to the people ( taking the interpretation ) and they may realize ( your value and dignity ) .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : You will cultivate as usual consecutively for seven years . So whatever you reap , keep it ( in store ) leaving the grains in their ears except a small quantity ( to thresh ) for your ( yearly ) consumption .
Then after this there will come seven hard years ( of drought ) which will consume that ( store ) which you will have laid up for these years except a small quantity ( which will fall surplus and ) which you will keep in reserve .
Then , following this will come a year during which people will be blessed with ( plenty of ) rain and ( the yield of fruits will be such as ) they will press juices ( of fruits that year ) .
And ( hearing this interpretation ) the king said : Bring Yusuf ( Joseph ) to me ( immediately ) . So when the messenger reached Yusuf ( Joseph ) , he said to him : Go back to your king and ask him : What is the state of those women ( now ) who cut their hands ? Surely my Lord knows their craft well .
The King ( called all the women including Zulaikha and ) asked : What happened to you when you ( all ) attempted to seduce Yusuf ( Joseph ) to turn him away from righteousness ? ( Explain what that affair was . ) They all ( unanimously ) uttered : Allah save us ! We have not noticed any evil in Yusuf ( Joseph ) . The wife of Aziz ( of Egypt , Zulaikha , too ) spoke : The truth has now become evident . ( The fact is that ) it was I who sought to seduce him for my purpose and it is surely he who is truthful .
( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) said : I have done this ) so that he ( Aziz of Egypt , who has been my master and benefactor , ) may know that I have not betrayed his trust in his absence ( behind him ) , and surely Allah lets not the plots of those who betray trusts prove successful .
And I do not ( claim ) absolution of my self . Certainly self commands much evil except the one on whom my Lord bestows Mercy . Surely , my Lord is All - Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And the King said : Bring him to me so that I may appoint him specifically ( as an adviser ) to me . So , when the King had ( one - to - one ) dialogue with him ( he felt highly impressed and ) said : ( O Yusuf [ Joseph ] , ) surely from today onward you are a man of authority and trust with us ( i . e . you are inducted into the governance of the state ) .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : ( If you really want me to accomplish some special assignment , then ) appoint me as ( a minister and trustee of ) the treasures in the land ( of Egypt ) . Indeed I am well versed in resource management and resource protection and an expert ( in financial management ) .
This is how We bestowed upon Yusuf ( Joseph ) the rule over the land ( of Egypt so that ) he could live therein wherever he desired . We honour with Our Mercy whom We will and waste not the reward of the pious .
And certainly the reward of the Hereafter is of greater value for those who believe and tread the path of Godwariness .
( During the days of famine ) Yusufs ( Josephs ) brothers came ( to Egypt to procure grain ) and came to him . So Yusuf ( Joseph ) recognized them , but they could not recognize him .
And when Yusuf ( Joseph ) had furnished them with their provisions ( supplies and material ) , he said : Bring me your brother on the fathers side ( Benjamin ) . Do you not see ( how ) full I measure and I am the best host ( too ) ?
So if you do not bring him to me , then ( in future ) there will not be any measure ( of grain ) with me for you , nor will you be able to approach me .
They said : We will solicit his father in connection with sending him and we will certainly do ( it ) .
And Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to his servants : Put their money ( which they paid for grain back ) into their sacks so that when they return to their family they may identify it ( that the money is back ) . It is likely that they may come again ( for the very same reason ) .
So when they returned to their father they said : O our father , ( further provision of ) grain for us has been banned ( except that Benjamin accompanies us . ) So send our brother ( Benjamin ) with us ( in order that ) we may fetch ( more ) grain , and we shall certainly be his guards .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Shall I trust you with him ( as well ) the same way as before this I trusted you with his brother ( Yusuf - Joseph ) ? Then Allah alone is the Best Protector , and He alone is the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
When they opened their packs , ( therein ) they found their money ( which ) had been returned to them . They said : O our respectable father , what else do we want ? Here is our money ( too ) that has been returned to us , and we shall ( now be obliged to ) fetch grain for our family . And we shall take good care of our brother , and will bring the load of a camel in addition . This grain ( that we have already brought ) is a small quantity .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : I shall not send him with you at all until you give me a firm promise by swearing a solemn oath by Allah that you shall certainly bring him ( back ) to me unless you ( all ) are beset ( somewhere or slain ) . Then , when they gave Yaqub the firm promise he said : Allah is the Guardian to watch over what we are saying .
And he said : O my sons , do not enter ( the city ) all of you by one gate but enter ( dispersed ) through different gates . And I cannot save you by any means from Allahs ( Decree ) because Judgment ( Destiny ) rests will Allah alone . In Him have I put my trust , and all those who trust must trust in Him alone .
And when they entered Egypt in compliance with what their father had commanded , that command could not save them from Allahs ( Decree ) but it was Yaqubs ( Jacobs ) heartfelt desire which he fulfilled and ( also take not this desire or strategy as meaningless for you know it not ) . Surely Yaqub ( Jacob ) possessed knowledge as We had blessed with ( special ) knowledge but most people do not know ( these realities ) .
And when they came to Yusuf ( Joseph ) , he offered his brother ( Benjamin ) a seat close to him ( and ) said ( to him quietly ) : Verily I am your brother ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) so feel not aggrieved at what they have been doing .
So when ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) had provided them with their material , he placed ( the Kings ) goblet into his brothers ( Benjamins ) sack . Later a herald called out : O you men of caravan , ( halt ; ) surely you ( seem to be ) thieves .
They turned towards them and said : What have you found missing ?
They ( the servants of the Kings court ) said : We are missing the royal goblet and the man who brings it ( after searching ) will get a camels load of grain as reward and I pledge myself for it .
They said : By Allah , indeed you know well we have not come ( here to commit some crime ) and create mischief in the land , nor are we thieves .
They ( the servants ) said : ( Decide for yourselves ) what should be the punishment ( of the thief ) if you turn out to be liars .
They said : Its penalty will be that the one from whose sack ( the goblet ) is found , he himself will be its penalty ( i . e . he should be held in retribution ) . That is how We punish the wrongdoers .
So Yusuf ( Joseph ) began to search their sacks before his brothers . Then ( at last ) he took ( the goblet ) out of his ( real ) brothers ( Benjamins ) sack . That is how We revealed to Yusuf ( Joseph ) the plan . He could not have held his brother ( as a captive ) under the law of the King ( of Egypt ) except ( as ) Allah wills . We exalt in ranks whom We like . And above every possessor of knowledge is ( also ) One possessing greater knowledge .
They said : If he has committed theft ( then nothing to wonder at ) . Indeed his brother ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) has also committed theft before . So Yusuf ( Joseph ) kept it ( hidden ) in his heart and did not reveal it to them and said ( only to himself ) : Yours is the worst case and Allah knows well whatever you are saying .
They said : O Aziz ( of Egypt ) , his father is an aged elderly person . So detain anyone of us in his stead . Surely we have seen you among the generous ( benevolent ) people .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Allah save us from detaining someone ( other ) than him with whom we have found our item ! Then We shall become of the unjust .
So , when they lost hope about Yusuf ( Joseph ) , they counselled ( among themselves ) in isolation . The eldest ( brother ) among them said : Do you not know that your father took a firm covenant from you in the Name of Allah , and before that ( you also know ) you committed excesses in respect of Yusuf ( Joseph ) ? So I shall not leave this land at all until my father accords me permission or Allah gives some judgment in my case and He is the Best of those who judge .
Go you back to your father and say : O our father , your son has surely committed theft ( and consequently he has been held ) . And we bore witness only to what we knew . And we were no guardians of the unseen .
And ( if you do not believe us , then ) you may enquire of ( the people of ) the town where we have been , and ( find out ) from the caravan we have travelled with , and we are certainly truthful ( in what we are saying ) .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : ( It is not so . ) In fact your ( ill - commanding ) selves have made this affair attractive for you . Now ( only ) patienceis the finest ( option ) . It is likely that Allah brings to me all of them . He is indeed All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) then turned his face away from them and said : Alas ! ( My dear son ) Yusuf ( Josephs unbearable separation ) ! And his eyes had gone white with grief . And he was suppressing his sorrow .
They said : By Allah , you will continue remembering Yusuf ( [ Joseph ] alone ) till you get near death or pass away .
He said : I bewail my worry and grief to Allah alone , and I know from Allah what you do not know .
O my sons , go and fetch me some news about Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother ( from somewhere ) and despair not of Allahs Mercy , for indeed only those despair of Allahs Mercy who reject faith .
So when they came back to Yusuf ( [ Joseph ] again ) , they submitted : O Aziz ( of Egypt ) , distress has fallen upon us and our family ( and we are suffering from dreadful famine ) . And we have brought only ( this ) meager amount . So give us full measure ( of grain against it ) and ( in addition ) extend to us ( some ) charity ( as well ) . Indeed Allah rewards those who give away charity plentiously .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Do you remember what you did to Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother ? Were you ( then ) ignorant ?
They said : Are you really Yusuf ( Joseph ) ? He said : ( Yes , ) I am Yusuf ( Joseph ) and here is my brother . Indeed Allah has been gracious to us . Surely the one who fears Allah and remains steadfast , then surely Allah does not waste the reward of the pious .
They exclaimed : By Allah , Allah has certainly exalted you above us , and certainly we alone were the sinners .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : No blame ( or penalty ) lies on you today . May Allah grant you His forgiveness and He is the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
Take this shirt of mine and cast it over my fathers face ; he will recover his sight . ( Then ) bring me the whole of your family .
When the caravan left ( Egypt ) , his father ( Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) said ( while sitting in Canaan ) : If you do not consider me unstable due to senility , I am smelling the fragrance of Yusuf ( Joseph ) .
They said : By Allah , you are certainly in the ( same ) ecstasy of your ( old ) love .
But when the bearer of the glad tidings arrived , and he cast that shirt over Yaqub ( Jacobs ) face , his sight returned the same moment . Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Did I not say to you that I know from Allah what you do not know ?
They said : O our father , seek for us forgiveness ( from Allah ) for our sins . Indeed we alone are the sinners .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Soon shall I pray to my Lord for forgiveness for you . Indeed He alone is Most Forgiving Ever - Merciful .
Then , when they ( i . e . all the members of the family ) came to Yusuf ( Joseph , he presented them a reception outside the city in the form of a royal procession comprising extensive transport arrangements , soldiers and general public , and ) he venerated his parents and made them sit beside him , ( or embraced them , ) and ( offering them welcome ) said : Enter Egypt and if Allah so wills ( then stay here ) with peace and comfort .
And he seated his parents on the throne and they ( all ) fell down prostrate before Yusuf ( Joseph ) and Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : O father , this is the interpretation of ( that ) dream of mine which I had seen ( long ) before . ( To most of the commentators it took forty years . ) And my Lord has surely proved it true . And indeed He did me a ( great ) favour when He took me out of the prison and brought all of you ( here ) from the desert after Satan had stirred up discord between me and my brothers . The fact is that my Lord makes easy with ( His ) plan whatever He wills . Indeed He alone is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
O my Lord ! Verily You granted me dominion and blessed me with the knowledge of the interpretation of dreams . O Creator of the heavens and the earth , You are my Helper in this world and in the Hereafter ( as well ) . Make me die in a state of total submission to ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Islam and make me join the company of those who are upright .
O My Esteemed Beloved ! This ( narrative ) is of the news of the unseen which We are revealing to you and you were not present with them when they ( Yusuf [ Josephs ] brothers ) were co - working to conclude their conspiracy and were plotting to deceive .
And most people will not believe even if you ( so ardently ) desire .
And you do not ask for any reward from them for this ( communicating and preaching the Message ) . This Quran is but a reminder to all mankind .
And how many a Sign is there in the heavens and the earth which these people pass by but they are heedless of them !
And most of them do not believe in Allah , but that they are polytheists .
Have they gone free from this fear that a prevailing calamity of Allahs torment will come upon them , or the Last Hour will seize them all of a sudden while they have no news of it ?
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) Say : This is my way . I invite towards Allah . I am ( firm and committed to ) my vision and insight , I and also he who complies with me . And Holy is Allah , and I am not of the polytheists .
And before you also We sent men alone from among the inhabitants of ( various ) towns to whom We sent Revelations . Have they not travelled in the land so that they might ( themselves ) witness what was the end of those before them ? And surely the Home in the Hereafter has far greater value for the Godfearing . Do you not have reason ?
Until when the Messengers despaired ( of their disobedient people , ) and those denying communities developed this scepticism that they were told a lie ( i . e . they will not be tormented ) , Our help reached the Messengers . Then We delivered whom We willed . And Our torment is not averted from the people committed to do evil .
Truly in their stories there is a lesson of warning for men of understanding . This ( Quran ) is not a Revelation that can be forged but a confirmation of those ( revealed Books ) which were revealed before it , an explanation of everything and guidance and mercy for those who believe .
Alif , Lam , Mim , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the Book of Allah , and whatever has been revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth , but most people do not believe .
And Allah is He Who has raised aloft the heavens ( in space ) without pillars ( as ) you see ; then He settled Himself on the Throne of His Authority ( encompassing the entire universe befitting His glory ) and fettered the sun and the moon to a system , each moving ( in its respective orbit to complete its rotation ) during its appointed term . He alone devises strategies for the total system ( of the entire universe ) and vividly manifests ( all the ) Signs ( or the laws of nature ) so that you may develop firm faith in appearing face to face before your Lord .
And He is the One Who spread out the earth ( despite its being round ) and brought about mountains and rivers in it and produced pairs of ( genders ) two each among all kinds of fruits ( as well . He is the One Who ) stretches the cover of the night over the day . Indeed there are ( many ) Signs in it for those who meditate .
And there are in the earth tracts ( of different kinds ) that are adjacent to each other and the gardens of grapes and crops and palm trees , clustered and non - clustered . All these are irrigated with the same water . And ( despite that ) We make some of them superior to others in taste . Verily there are ( great ) Signs in it for the people who apply reason .
And if you are surprised ( at the denial of the disbelievers ) , then ( more ) surprising is this that they say : What , when we become dust ( after death ) , shall we then be created anew ? They are the ones who deny their Lord , and they alone will have shackles round their necks . And they are the ones who are the inmates of Hell . They will reside in it forever .
And they hasten to demand from you punishment before mercy though many torments have passed before them . And , ( O Beloved , ) your Lord is Most Forgiving to the people despite their ( oppression and ) injustice . But certainly your Lord is Severe in punishment ( as well ) .
And the disbelievers say : Why has any Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger ) from his Lord ? ( O My Glorious Messenger ! ) You are only a warner ( to the disobedient of their evil consequences ) and a provider of guidance to every community ( of the world ) .
Allah knows what every female bears in her womb , and how much the wombs contract and how much they distend , and with Him is everything in a fixed measure .
He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen , the Most Great ( and ) the Most Exalted .
He among you who talks in a low voice and the other who talks in a loud voice , and he who is hidden in ( the darkness of ) the night and he who moves about in the day ( light ) , all are alike ( to Him ) .
For ( every ) human being there are ( angels ) coming in succession who , before him and behind him , guard him by the Command of Allah . Verily , Allah does not change the state of a people until they bring about a change in themselves . And when Allah intends to torment a people ( due to their own evil works ) , then none can avert it . Nor is there any helper for them apart from Allah .
He is the One Who , to rouse in you ( sometime ) fear and ( some other time ) hope , shows you lightning and ( at times ) raises ( rain - laden ) heavy clouds .
The thunder ( of clouds and lightning or the angel appointed over it ) and all angels glorify Him with His Praise out of His fear . And He sends thunderbolts and strikes with them whom He wills . And they ( the disbelievers , despite these Signs of His Might , ) dispute about Allah . And He is Stern in strategy and Severe in grip .
Calling towards the Truth ( i . e . the Oneness of Allah ) is for Him alone . And those ( false gods - idols ) they ( i . e . disbelievers ) worship besides Him cannot give them any answer at all . Their example is like the one who ( sits ) stretching both his palms towards water so that it may reach his mouth ( itself ) , but it ( i . e . water ) reaches not ( like this ) . And ( in like manner ) the praying of disbelievers ( to idols and their idol - worship ) is but wandering distracted .
And whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrates himself before Allah , ( some ) willingly and ( others ) perforce , and their shadows ( too prostrate themselves before Him ) morning and evening . ( Then why do the disbelievers do idol - worship turning away from Allah ? )
Say ( before these disbelievers ) : Who is the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth ? Say ( yourself ) : Allah . ( Again ) ask ( them ) : Have you taken besides Allah ( these idols ) as your protectors who cannot control any profit or loss even for themselves ? Say : Can the blind and the seeing be equal ? Or can darkness and light be the same ? Have they associated such partners with Allah that have also created ( some creation ) themselves similar to that of Allah , so this creation ( created by these idols ) has caused them doubt of resemblance ( i . e . error of judgment that they too could create as Allah does ) ? Say : Allah alone is the Creator of everything . And He is One . He is Dominant over all .
He sends down water from the sky and the valleys flow according to their ( respective ) capacity . Then the floodwater carries the scum raised to the surface . And the items that are heated in the fire for making ornaments or other articles also have foam that comes up the same way . Thus Allah illustrates examples of the Truth and falsehood . So , ( whether produced by water or by fire ) the foam or scum passes away useless but what is beneficial to the people endures in the earth . That is how Allah illustrates examples .
For those who accept the Command of their Lord is the excellent outcome . And those who reject His Command , even though they possess all that is in the earth and the like of it added to that , and they atone it ( to be delivered from torment , even then ) they are the ones whose accountability will be horrible . And Hell is their abode , and that is a wretched abode .
Someone who knows that whatever has been revealed to you is the Truth , can he be like the one who is blind ? Truly it is only those endowed with wisdom who accept admonition .
Who fulfil their pledge to Allah and do not breach their covenant .
And who keep unified all ( fulfil all their obligations to Allah , their obligations to the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , to humanity at large and to their close relatives ) that Allah has enjoined to be unified and remain in a state of fear from Allah and dread an evil reckoning .
And who remain steadfast in seeking the pleasure of their Lord , and establish Prayer and spend ( both ) secretly and openly out of the sustenance We have provided and continue eliminating evil by means of good ; they are the ones for whom there is a ( beautiful ) home in the Hereafter .
( There ) are evergreen gardens . They will enter them with the pious from among their ancestors , their wives and their children . And the angels will come to them through every door ( of Paradise ) .
( Greeting and felicitating them , they will say : ) Peace be upon you as a reward for your patience . So ( see now ) what a beautiful home it is of the Hereafter !
And those who break the promise of Allah after making it firm and strand all ( the relations and obligations ) that Allah has commanded to be kept unified , and do mischief and strife in the land upon them is the curse and for them is evil home .
Allah releases the provision abundantly for whom He pleases and restrains ( for whom He wills ) . And these ( disbelievers ) are greatly charmed by the worldly life whereas , in contrast with the life in the Hereafter , the worldly life is nothing but a worthless provision .
And the disbelievers say : Why has any Sign not been sent down to him ( the Messenger ) from his Lord ? Say : Verily Allah , ( despite Signs , ) holds astray whom He wills and leads him towards Himself who turns to Him in repentance .
Those who believe and their hearts become calm and contented with the remembrance of Allah know that it is the remembrance of Allah alone that brings calm to the hearts .
Those who believe and do pious works , for them there are pleasures and rejoicing and excellent abode ( in the Hereafter ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Thus We have sent you ( as Messenger ) to an Umma ( Community ) before whom in fact ( all ) the communities have passed . ( This is now the last of all the communities ) so that you may recite to them that ( Book ) which We have revealed to you . And they are still denying ar - Rahman ( the Most Kind Lord ) . Say : He is my Lord . There is no God but He . In Him have I put my trust and I turn towards Him alone .
And if there were a Quran by which mountains could be set in motion , or by which the earth could be split open or by which the dead could be spoken to , ( even then they would not believe in it ) . But all matters are under the Control of Allah . Have the believers not yet perceived that if Allah had so willed , He would have guided all mankind ? And ( some ) disaster will continue afflicting the disbelievers due to their misdeeds or will be alighting close to their homes ( i . e . towns ) until Allahs promise ( of torment ) comes to pass . Surely Allah does not go against His promise .
Indeed the Messengers were mocked ( by the disbelievers ) before you ( as well ) . So I granted the disbelievers respite and then seized them ( with torment ) . ( See ) then how My torment was !
He ( Allah ) Who is watching the conduct of every soul and ( these idols that the disbelievers ) have made peers to Allah ( can they be alike ? No way ! ) Say : ( Just ) name them . ( You fools ! ) Do you inform Him ( Allah ) of something whose ( existence ) He does not know in the whole earth ? Or is it all ( mere ) superficial talk ( which has no contact with reality ) ? Rather ( the truth is that ) the deceptive scheme of the disbelievers has been made fascinating to them and they have been hindered from the ( straight ) path . And he whom Allah holds strayed , there is none who can be his guide .
There is for them chastisement in the worldly life ( as well ) , but certainly the torment in the Hereafter is more fierce . And there is none who can rescue them from ( the punishment of ) Allah .
A glimpse of the Paradise that has been promised to the Godfearing ( depicts that ) it has rivers flowing under it . Its fruits are everlasting , and so ( also ) is its shade . This is ( the beauty of ) the end of those who adopt Godwariness . And the end of the disbelievers is the Fire of Hell .
And those whom We have given the Book ( the Torah , if they are true believers , then ) they rejoice at this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you . And also some from among their sects are those who deny a part of it . Say : I have been given only this command that I worship Allah and must not associate ( any ) partner with Him . I invite towards Him alone , and to Him have I to return .
And in like manner We have revealed this ( Quran ) as a Commandment in the Arabic language . And , ( O listener , ) if you follow the desires of these ( disbelievers ) after the ( conclusive ) knowledge has reached you , then there is no helper or protector for you against Allah .
And , ( O Messenger , ) indeed We sent before you ( many ) Messengers and brought up for them wives and children ( as well ) . And that is not the role of a Messenger to bring a Sign but by Allahs Command . There is an inscription for every appointed term .
Allah erases whatever ( writing ) He wills and confirms ( whatever He wills ) . And with Him alone is the Real Book ( the Protected Tablet [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And whether We show you ( during your visible life ) a portion ( of the torment ) that We have promised these ( disbelievers ) , or We lift you ( before that - both these options are subject to Our Will ) . Your assignment is only to communicate ( the Commandments ) and accountability rests with Us .
Do they not see that We are persistently reducing the land ( under their control - most of the areas under their rule are gradually accepting the Islamic Rule ) ? And Allah is the One Who decrees ; there is none who can undo His decree . And He is Swift in accountability .
And no doubt they also indulged in deceitful plots who have passed before them . So the power to reverse all these plots ( also ) rests with Allah . He knows best what every soul is busy earning , and the disbelievers will soon come to know for whom is the Home of the Hereafter !
And the disbelievers say : You are not a Messenger . Say : Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between you and me ( on my Messengership ) , and so also is the one who ( exactly ) possesses the knowledge of the ( revealed ) Book .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meanings . ) It is a ( glorious ) Book which We have revealed to you so that you may bring mankind out of the darkness ( of disbelief ) to the light ( of faith . And moreover ) by the Command of their Lord ( lead them ) to the path of the Almighty , the Praiseworthy
Allah , to Whom belongs ( all ) that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . And there is destruction for the disbelievers on account of severe punishment .
They are the people who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter , and hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah , and look for crookedness in it ( the True Din [ Religion ] ) . They ( have fallen ) deep into error .
And We have not sent any Messenger but with the language of his people so that he may make ( the message of the Truth ) more and more clear to them . Then Allah leads astray whom He wills and provides with guidance whom He wills . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs : ( O Musa [ Moses ] ) , bring your people out of darkness to the light and remind them of the Days of Allah ( which had come upon them and their preceding generations ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who are highly steadfast ( and ) deeply grateful .
And ( call to mind the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Recall ( that ) blessing of Allah conferred upon you when He delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who used to afflict you with severe torment , slaying your male children and sparing the female ones . And in it was a great trial for you from your Lord .
And ( recall ) when your Lord proclaimed : If you thank , I shall certainly increase ( My blessings on ) you , and if you are ungrateful , then My torment is surely severe .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : If you and all others on earth disbelieve , then Allah is indeed Self - Sufficient , Most Praisworthy .
Has the account not reached you of those who have passed away before you ? They were the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and ( of the communities ) of Ad and Thamud and ( others ) who came after them . No one knows them except Allah ( because they have been totally annihilated from the surface of the earth ) . Their Messengers came to them with Clear Signs . So they put their hands into their mouths ( out of mockery and spite ) and ( dared ) say : We deny this ( Din [ Religion ] ) which you have been sent with , and we are certainly in awe - inspiring doubt about what you invite us to .
Their Messengers said : Do you have doubt about Allah Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth , ( Who ) calls you so that He forgives your sins for you and ( despite your disobedience ) gives you respite for a fixed term ? They ( the disbelievers ) said : You are but human beings like us . You seek to hold us back from these ( idols ) our fathers used to worship . So bring us some clear proof .
Their Messengers said to them : Though ( in constitution of self ) we are humans like you , but ( also mark the difference that ) Allah favours whom He likes of His servants . ( Then how are you equal ? ) And ( as for clear proof ) it is not for us to bring you a proof without Allahs decree , and the believers must put their trust in Allah alone .
And what is the matter with us that we should not put our trust in Allah while He alone has shown us the paths ( of guidance and success ) ? And we will certainly bear your persecutions with patience , and those who trust should put their trust in Allah alone .
And the disbelievers said to their Messengers : We will banish you by all means from our country , or you will have to return to our faith . Their Lord then revealed to them : We shall certainly destroy the unjust people .
And We shall certainly settle you in the ( same ) land after them . This ( covenant ) is for every such person that fears standing before My Presence and dreads My promise ( of torment ) .
And ( ultimately ) the Messengers sought victory ( from Allah ) , and every obstinate rebel met defeat and came to nothing .
Beyond this ( devastation ) is Hell ( again ) . And he will be served with fetid water of oozing pus .
Which he will take sip by sip with great difficulty , and will not be able to gulp it down the throat . And death will assail him from all sides , and he will not be able ( even ) to die . And that ( again ) will be followed by ( one more ) extremely grievous torment .
The example of those who have rejected faith in their Lord is that their works are like ashes on which blows the strong wind on a stormy day they are unable to grasp anything of the ( works ) that they earned . This is straying far into error .
( O listener ! ) Have you not seen that Allah has created the heavens and the earth in accordance with ( a strategy based on ) the Truth . He can annihilate you if He so wills and bring new creation ( in your place ) .
And this is not ( in the least ) difficult for Allah ( to execute ) .
And ( on the Day of Grand Assembly ) all ( the higher and the lower ranks ) will appear before Allah . The weak ones ( the followers ) will ask the ( powerful ) arrogant ones : We obeyed you ( the whole life ) . So can you now manage for us some degree of rescue from Allahs torment ? Those ( affluent ones ) will reply ( to their poor followers ) : Had Allah guided us , we would also have shown you the path of guidance ( i . e . we were ourselves misguided so we misguided you too ) . It is all the same ( today ) whether we sigh and wail or forbear . We have no way to escape .
And when the decision will have been given , Satan will say : Indeed Allah gave you a true promise , and I ( also ) promised you something ; so I have violated the promise . And I had no authority over you ( in the world ) except that I called you ( towards falsehood ) . So you accepted my call ( for your own interest ) . Now do not blame me but blame your ( own ) selves . I can do nothing ( today ) to help you out , nor can you extend any help to me . Before this you have been associating me as a partner ( with Allah ) . Surely I deny that ( today ) . Undoubtedly there is a painful punishment for the wrongdoers .
And those who believe and stick to pious deeds will be admitted to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live there forever by the Command of Allah . Their greeting word there ( at the time of meeting ) will be : Peace .
Have you not seen how Allah sets forth the example : a good word is like a good tree ? Its root is firm ( in the earth ) and its branches reach into the sky .
( That tree ) yields fruit at all times by the Command of its Lord , and Allah illustrates examples for the people so that they may take advice .
And the example of an evil word is like that of an evil tree which is uprooted from the surface of the earth ( and ) which has no chance to get firm ( in the soil and survive ) .
Allah keeps the believers firm - footed in the life of this world as well as in the Hereafter with ( the blessing ) of this Firm Word , but Allah holds the wrongdoers astray . And Allah puts into action whatever He wills .
Have you not seen those who have exchanged Allahs Favour ( of belief ) for disbelief and have lowered their people into the house of destruction ?
( That ) is Hell in which they will be thrown headlong , and that is an evil abode .
And they set up partners with Allah so that they may turn ( the people ) away from His path . Say : Benefit ( a few days ) gain ; surely you will end up in the Fire .
Say to My servants who have believed that they must establish Prayer and spend ( in Our Way ) both secretly and openly of the provision that We have granted them before the dawn of the Day when neither any transaction will take place nor any ( worldly ) friendship ( will profit ) .
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and poured down water from the sky and then by means of this water produced fruits for you as provision . And He has made vessels subservient to you so that they may sail in the sea by Allahs Command and He has ( also ) put rivers under your control .
And for your benefit He has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a regular system ) ; they keep rotating ( in their respective orbits ) . And He has also subdued the night and the day ( to a system ) for your ( system of life ) .
And He has given you everything that you asked Him for and if you seek to number the Favours of Allah , you will not be able to count them all . Indeed Man is highly unjust and extremely ungrateful .
And ( recall the time ) when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) submitted : O my Lord , make this city ( Makka ) a land of peace and keep me and my children from idol - worship .
O my Lord ! These ( idols ) have led many people astray . So whoever follows me will belong to me , and whoever disobeys me then indeed You are Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O our Lord ! Verily , I have settled my offspring ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) in the barren valley ( of Makka ) in the close vicinity of Your Sacred House , O our Lord , so that they may establish Prayer . So make the hearts of the people incline towards them with love and fondness , and provide for them ( all kinds of ) fruits as sustenance so that they may remain grateful .
O our Lord ! Surely You know ( all ) what we hide and what we show , and there is nothing which is hidden from Allah either on earth or in the heaven .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has bestowed upon me ( two sons ) in old age , Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) . Indeed my Lord is the All - Hearer of prayer .
O my Lord ! Make me and my children the ones who establish Prayer ; O my Lord , and grant my prayer .
O my Lord ! Forgive me and ( forgive ) my parents and all the believers as well on the Day when reckoning ( and accountability ) will be held .
And never think of Allah to be unaware of the works the wrongdoers are doing . He is only giving them ( the wrongdoers ) respite till the Day on which the eyes will be stare - fixed ( in horror ) .
Their heads lifted up , they will be running ( towards the Field of Reckoning - Assembly ) , with eyes unable to twinkle and with hearts being drained of strength .
And warn the people of the Day when the torment will come upon them . Those who will have been doing injustice will say : O our Lord , grant us respite for a while so that we may accept Your message and follow the Messengers . ( It will be said to them : ) Are you not those who used to swear before that you would never fall ?
And ( in your own turn ) you were dwelling in the palaces ( vacated by ) those who had wronged their souls ( during their respective eras ) whereas this had dawned on you how We had dealt with them and We also elucidated examples for your ( easy comprehension ) .
And ( having lost their balance intoxicated by wealth and power ) they hatched many plots while Allah had the countermeasures to foil all their plots , although their deceitful strategies were sufficient even to uproot the mountains .
So never think that Allah will ever break His promise with His Messengers . Indeed Allah is Almighty , the Lord of Retribution .
The Day when ( this ) earth will be changed into a different earth and all the heavens will also be changed and the entire mankind will appear before Allah , the One , and the Dominant over all .
And that Day you will see the sinners fettered in chains .
Their garments will be of pitch ( or some inflammable oil ) and the Fire will be enveloping their faces .
So that Allah may requite every soul for ( the deeds ) it has earned . Indeed Allah is Swift in Reckoning .
This ( Quran ) is perfect communication of the Message to mankind so that by means of this they may be warned and that they may conscientiously bear it in mind that He ( Allah ) is One God , and that those who possess wisdom may take advice .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the verses of the ( Glorious ) Book and the Enlightening Quran .
( Watching the scenes of Allahs Mercy on the believers in the Hereafter , ) the disbelievers would persistently aspire : would that they were Muslims !
( Feel not aggrieved . ) Leave them . Let them eat ( and drink ) and make merry and let ( their ) false hopes keep them negligent ( of the Hereafter ) . Then they will come to know ( their end ) soon .
And never have We destroyed any township but that there was for them a known inscription ( law , which they violated and met their fate ) .
No people can go beyond its appointed term nor can they step back ( under the law of rise and fall ) .
And ( the disbelievers ) say ( insolently ) : O man on whom this Quran has been revealed , indeed you are insane .
Why do you not bring us angels if you are truthful ?
We do not send down angels but with the ( judgment of ) Truth ( i . e . We send them down to execute the torment when its time approaches ) and they are not granted respite at that time .
Assuredly We alone have revealed this Glorious Admonition ( the Quran ) , and surely We alone will guard it .
And We indeed sent Messengers before you as well among earlier generations .
And there did not come to them any Messenger but they would mock him .
That is how We infuse this ( mockery and ridicule ) into the hearts of the sinners .
These people will not believe in this ( Quran ) and ( this ) is what has been the practice of the bygone people .
And if We open to them some gate in the heaven ( and also make this possible for them that ) they keep ascending through ( it ) the whole day .
( Even then ) they will certainly say ( this ) : Our eyes have been hypnotized ( through some magic trick and deceit ) , rather we are spellbound .
And indeed We brought into existence constellations in the heavens ( in the form of galaxies to safeguard the planets ) , and adorned this ( spatial universe ) for the beholders .
And We have ensured the protection of this ( system of heavenly universe ) from every outcast Satan ( i . e . from destructive phenomenon of every rebellious force ) .
But anyone who tries to eavesdrop , a ( blazing ) illuminating meteor follows it .
And We have spread out the earth ( despite its being round ) , and We brought about firm mountains in it ( by allying different elements together ) , and in it We provided means of growth to all species in ( requisite ) proportion .
And in it We generated for you means of subsistence and also for those ( human beings , animals and birds ) whom you do not provide for .
And there is not a thing ( in the universe ) but that We have its treasures with Us and We send it down only according to a fixed quantity .
And We send winds carrying the burden of clouds . Then We pour down water from the sky . Then it is you whom We give it to drink , and it is not you who maintain its reservoirs .
And indeed We alone give life and cause death , and We alone are the Inheritor ( and the Owner of all ) .
And surely We know those who lived before you and We also do know those who will come after you .
Verily it is your Lord Who will gather them together ( on the Day of Resurrection ) . Surely He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And indeed We originated mans ( chemical ) genesis from that dry sounding clay which , ( first ) having grown old ( and under heat of the sun and other chemical and biological effects ) , had turned into black stinking mud .
And We created jinn before this from a smokeless blazing fire .
And ( call to mind the occasion ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to create a human organism from the old ( and ) black stinking , resounding mud .
So when I accomplish bringing his ( physical ) constitution into its perfect real being and breathe My ( Divine ) Spirit into ( the inner self of ) this ( human physical ) organism , then fall down prostrate before him .
So , ( no sooner did the light of Allahs effulgence light in the human organism than ) all the angels fell down in prostration together .
Except Iblis . He refused to join those who prostrated themselves .
( Allah ) said : O Iblis , what has happened to you that you have not joined those who have prostrated themselves ?
( Iblis ) replied : I cannot be the one who should fall down prostrate before a human being You have created from an old ( and ) black stinking and sounding mud .
( Allah ) said : Then get out from here , for you are indeed the cursed one ( the outcast ) .
And , verily , the curse will ( persistently ) rest upon you till the Day of Recompense .
He said : O Lord , then grant me respite till the Day ( when ) people will be raised up ( again ) .
Allah said : So , indeed , you are among those granted respite .
Till the Day of the appointed time ( Resurrection ) .
Iblis said : O Lord , because You have led me astray , I will ( also ) best adorn and embellish for them ( the sins , revolts and violations ) in the earth and will certainly lead all of them astray by all means .
Except for those exalted servants of Yours who have attained freedom ( from my deceits and intrigues of the ill - commanding selves ) .
Allah said : This ( freedom from these deceits and intrigues ) is the ( very ) path that leads straight to My Threshold .
Surely , you will in no way be able to influence My servants ( who have attained this freedom from you ) except the misguided lot who have adopted your way .
And verily the promised place for all of them is Hell .
It has seven doors ; for each one a fixed portion of them has been specified .
Indeed the Godfearing will be amid Gardens and fountains .
( It will be said to them : ) Enter them peacefully , throwing away fears .
And We shall remove from their breasts all spite that they had ( in the world against one another due to misunderstanding ) . They shall be brothers seated on couches face to face ( in Paradise ) .
No discomfort will touch them nor will they be driven out from there .
( O Beloved ! ) Tell My servants : I am Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( also warn ) that : It is My torment which is the most grievous torment .
And relate to them ( also ) the news about the guests of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
When they came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) they greeted ( him with ) : Peace . Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : We are feeling somewhat afraid of you .
( The guest angels ) said : Do not feel afraid . We give you the glad tidings of ( the birth of ) a son endowed with knowledge and wisdom .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : You are giving me the glad tidings at a time when old age has already overtaken me . So what good news are you giving me now ?
They said : We give you good news which is true . So do not lose hope .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Who can lose hope of his Lords Mercy except the strayed ones ?
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) asked : O deputed angels ( sent by Allah ) , what other assignment do you have ( to accomplish besides these glad tidings for which you have come ) ?
They said : We have been sent towards a sinful people .
Except the family of Lut ( Lot ) all of whom We will indeed save .
With the exception of his wife . We have decided that she shall certainly be among those who stay back ( to become the victims of the torment ) .
Then , when those deputed ( angels ) came to the house of Lut ( Lot ) .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Indeed you are ( looking ) strangers .
They said : ( No indeed ; ) in fact we have come to you with the ( punishment ) about which these people have had doubts .
And we have brought to you ( the judgment of ) the Truth and we are certainly truthful .
So set off with your family sometime during the night and follow them in the rear and none of you must ( even ) look back , and proceed to the place ( where ) you have been commanded to .
And We informed Lut ( Lot ) of this judgment through Revelation that the root of these people shall be cut off the moment it dawns .
And the people of the city ( possessed by their lust ) approached ( Lut [ Lot ] ) rejoicing .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Surely they are my guests , so do not put me to shame ( about them ) .
And fear ( the wrath of ) Allah and do not humiliate me .
Those ( lost in wickedness ) said : ( O Lut [ Lot ] , ) did we not forbid you ( providing protection to ) all the people of the world ?
Lut ( Lot ) said : There are my ( peoples ) daughters . If you desire to do something ( then marry them instead of perpetrating indecency ) .
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) By your ( sacred ) life , surely these people ( too ) are wandering astray , possessed by their lust ( like the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So , the blazing Blast seized them at sunrise .
And We turned their town upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay .
Verily in this ( occurrence ) there are Signs for those who possess the ability to probe into reality .
And truly that town lies along a frequented highway .
Surely in this ( episode of the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) there is a Sign of ( warning ) for the believers .
And , in reality , the dwellers of al - Aika ( the Thick Wood ) too were hardened wrongdoers .
So We avenged Ourselves on them ( as well ) and both these ( towns still exist ) on the highway .
And no doubt the people of the valley of al - Hijr ( the Rock ) too denied the Messengers .
And We bestowed upon them ( also ) Our Signs but they persisted in turning away from them .
And they used to carve out houses in the mountains without any threat and fear .
And the dreadful Blast seized them ( as well ) the moment it dawned .
So the ( riches ) they used to earn could not repel ( Allahs punishment ) from them .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them without any purpose . And the Hour of Resurrection is certainly approaching . So , ( O embodiment of excellent morality , ) bear with ( them ) most graciously and effectively with perseverance .
Indeed your Lord alone is the Creator of all things , All - Knowing .
And surely We have bestowed upon you the seven oft - recited Verses ( i . e . chapter al - Fatiha ) and the Glorious Quran .
Do not even lift your eyes towards the things with which We have benefitted the disbelievers for their ( few days ) luxury , nor grieve over their ( turning away from the straight path ) , and keep your wings ( of affection and care ) lowered over the believers ( to make them feel contented and cared for ) .
And say : Indeed I am ( now ) the open and clear Warner ( of Allahs torment ) .
The ( torment ) that We sent down upon the dividers ( i . e . the Jews and the Christians ) .
Those who divided the Quran into pieces ( and split it i . e . accepted the favourable verses but rejected the others ) .
So , by your Lord , We shall indeed interrogate them all .
Pertaining to the works that they used to do .
So declare openly all those ( matters ) that you have been commanded and turn away from those who set up partners with Allah .
Surely We suffice you for ( taking them to task ) who scoff .
Who set up other gods along with Allah . So they will come to know ( their end ) soon .
And We indeed know that your ( sacred ) breast feels straitened by what they say .
So glorify your Lord with His praise and live among those who prostrate themselves before Him .
And worship your Lord till you attain to that station of certainty of faith ( which goes with your glory i . e . perfect cognizance of divinity or the moment of union with the Divine Essence ) .
The promise of Allah has drawn ( near ) , so do not hasten in seeking it . Holy is He and exalted far above those objects which the disbelievers set up as ( His ) peers .
He alone sends down the angels by His Command with Revelation ( which is the spirit of all the teachings of Din [ Religion ] ) to those of His servants He likes : Warn ( the people ) that there is no God except Me , so adopt fearing Me against all evils .
He alone has created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy . He is exalted far above those objects which the disbelievers set up as ( His ) peers .
He alone has created man from a drop of vital fluid , yet he has become openly contentious ( instead of becoming totally submissive to Allah ) .
And He alone has created for you cattle . They are for you a source of warm clothing and ( other ) benefits . And you ( also ) eat some of them .
And there is beauty in them ( and also a joy an aesthetic pleasure ) for you when you drive ( them back ) in the evening from pasture and when you drive ( them ) out in the morning ( to graze ) .
And these ( animals also ) carry your loads to those distant cities ( and remote areas ) where you cannot reach ( otherwise ) without toiling hard . Surely your Lord is Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
And ( He is the One Who has created ) horses , mules and donkeys so that you may ride them and that they may serve as means of adornment ( for you ) as well and He will ( further ) create ( such ornamented means of conveyance ) that you do not know ( today ) .
And the middle course reaches ( the door of ) Allah and many crooked side tracks also ( branch off ) from it . And had He so willed , He would have guided all of you .
He is the One Who has sent down for you water from the sky . ( Some ) of it is to drink and ( some ) of it is for plantation . ( You grow with it plants , vegetation and pastures ) wherein you take ( your cattle ) to graze .
With the same water He grows for you crops and olives and date - palms and grapes and all kinds of fruit . Indeed there are Signs in it for those who reflect and meditate .
And He ( is the One Who ) has subjected to your service the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and all the stars have also been made subservient to ( the system according to ) His strategy . Surely there are Signs in it for those who possess reason .
And ( of the animal world , vegetable world and minerals ) whatever He has created for you in the earth which have separate colours ( genders , species , classes , characteristics and benefits , etc . all have been subdued to your service ) . Verily , there is a Sign in it for those who take advice .
And He is the One Who has subjected sea ( rivers and oceans ) as well ( in addition to air and land ) so that you may eat fresh ( and favourite ) seafood from there and may take out from them gems ( etc . ) that you wear as ornaments . And , ( O man , ) you see the vessels ( and ships ) that pierce through the water ( of the rivers and oceans ) . And ( all this has been managed ) so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e . sustenance , far and wide ) and also that you may become thankful .
And He is the One Who has created firm mountains in the earth ( by allying various elements ) lest it tremors while carrying you ( revolving in its orbit ) , and rivers and ( also natural ) routes so that you may find way ( to reach the destinations ) .
And set up landmarks ( to navigate during the day ) . And ( at night as well ) people find ( their ) way by means of the stars .
Can the Creator Who creates ( all that ) be like the one who cannot create ( anything ) ? Do you not then accept advice ?
And if you want to count the favours of Allah , you will not be able to number them all . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And Allah knows what you hide and what you show .
And the ( idols ) whom these ( polytheists ) worship besides Allah cannot create anything ; they have rather been created themselves .
( They ) are non - living , inanimate objects which do not ( even ) sense when the people will be raised up .
Your God is One God . So those who do not believe in the Hereafter are deniers at heart and are beliers and arrogant .
This is verily true and established that Allah knows all that they hide and all that they show . Surely He does not like the defiers and arrogant .
And when they are asked : What has your Lord sent down ? they retort : False fables of the people gone by ( have been sent down ) .
( They are making all these utterances ) so that they may carry full load ( of their evildoings ) on the Day of Resurrection and also ( carry ) some load of those that they are misguiding due to ( their ) ignorance . Beware ! It is an extremely evil load which they are carrying .
No doubt those who lived before them ( also ) devised plots , but Allah knocked down the edifice ( of their deceptive plots ) from its foundations , and the roof caved in upon them , and the torment came at them from where they never thought of .
Then He will humiliate them on the Day of Resurrection and say : Where are those that you set up as peers to Me and in whose favour you disputed ( with the believers ) ? Those endowed with knowledge will say : Today ( all types of ) humiliation and destruction will surely befall the disbelievers .
Whom the angels cause to die while they are ( constantly ) doing wrong to their own souls . They will display obedience and submission ( on the Day of Resurrection and say : ) We were not used to doing any evil ( in the world ) . No indeed ! Allah surely has thorough knowledge of what you used to do .
So , enter the gates of Hell . You are its permanent residents . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
And ( when ) the Godfearing are asked : What has your Lord sent down ? they say : All good ( for here and the Hereafter has been sent down ) . There is good for those who do good in this world ( too ) , and certainly the House of the Hereafter is even better . And how excellent is the house of those who are Godfearing !
There are Gardens of Eternity which they will enter with streams flowing under them . Therein will be ( available ) whatever they will long for . That is how Allah rewards the God - fearing .
The angels take their lives while they are pure , clean , pleased and contented ( due to obedience and piety . The angels tell them the moment they take their lives : ) Peace be upon you . Enter Paradise due to ( the pious deeds ) that you used to do .
And what else are they waiting for except that the angels should come to them or there should reach the command ( of torment ) from your Lord ? Those before them ( also ) did the same . And Allah did not do them any wrong but they themselves used to wrong their own souls .
So the punishments that came upon them were due to the acts that they had perpetrated , and the same ( chastisement ) they used to make fun of engulfed them .
And those who set up peers with Allah say : Had Allah so willed , We would not have worshipped anything apart from Him , neither we nor our fathers . Nor would we have forbidden anything without His ( Command ) . Those before them ( also ) did the same . Are the Messengers responsible for anything in addition to conveying clearly ( the Message and Commandments of Allah ) ?
And indeed We sent a Messenger in every people : ( O people , ) worship Allah and keep away from Taghut ( i . e . Satan and idol - worship ) . Then some among them were those whom Allah guided , and there were others among them for whom misguidance proved ( appropriate ) . So travel through the land and see what was the end of those who belied ( the Truth ) !
If you ardently desire them to take the path of guidance then ( let not your sanctified disposition be overburdened ) , for indeed Allah does not guide him whom He holds strayed , nor do they have any helpers .
And they swear by Allah most earnestly that Allah will not resurrect him who dies . No Indeed ! The true promise is a bountiful obligation upon Him , but most people do not know .
( The dead will be raised up again ) so that He makes evident ( the Truth ) wherein they disagree and that the disbelievers may realize that they alone are in fact liars .
Our Command for a thing is but only this much that when We intend ( to bring ) it ( into existence ) We say to it : Be , and it becomes .
And those who emigrated after they had been subjected to ( different kinds of ) torture and brutality , We will certainly provide them with a better abode in this ( very ) world . And the reward in the Hereafter is certainly greater . Would that they knew ( this secret )
Those who remain steadfast and put their trust in their Lord !
And before you also We sent only men as Messengers towards whom We sent Our Revelations . So if you yourselves do not know ( anything ) , then ask the People of Remembrance .
( They too were sent ) with clear proofs and the Books . And , ( O Glorious Messenger , ) We have revealed to you the Glorious Reminder ( the Quran ) so that you may explain clearly to people ( the Message and the Commandments ) that have been sent down to them and that they may meditate .
Have these evil and deceitful people gone free of the fear that Allah may sink them into the earth , or may send to them torment from ( any ) quarter that is beyond their imagination ?
Or He may seize them during their movements ( travelling and business trips ) . So , they cannot hinder Allah .
Or He may seize them for being struck with fear . Indeed your Lord is Most Compassionate , Ever - Merciful .
Have they not seen those ( shady ) objects which Allah has created ; their shadows keep crawling on the right and the left sides prostrating themselves before Allah ? And , ( in fact , in this way ) they display humbleness and obedience .
And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all living beings and angels prostrate themselves before Allah ( alone ) and are not ( in the least ) proud and arrogant .
They keep fearing their Lord , Who is high above them , and obey whatever the command they are given .
And Allah has ordained : Do not take two gods ; assuredly He ( Allah ) alone is the only One God . So fear Me alone persistently .
And whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone , and obligatory ( for all ) is obedience to Him alone . Do you then fear ( anyone ) other than Allah ?
And whatever blessing you have been provided with is from Allah alone . Then , when some distress afflicts you , you wail and weep only before Him .
Then , when Allah removes that distress from you , a party from amongst you starts setting up partners with their Lord .
( This disbelief and polytheism is perpetrated ) so that they may show ingratitude for those ( blessings ) which We have bestowed upon them . So , ( O polytheists , ) take this ( a few days ) benefit , then soon will you know ( your end ) .
And they ascribe a portion of the provisions which We have given them for those ( idols ) whose ( reality ) even they themselves do not know . By Allah , you will indeed be asked about what you fabricate .
And they ( the disbelievers and polytheists ) ascribe daughters to Allah . Glory be to Him , ( He is far above that ; ) and for themselves they prefer what they desire ( i . e . sons ) .
And when the news ( of the birth ) of a daughter is disclosed to any of them , his face turns dark and he gets pent up with anger .
He seeks to hide himself from people due to the ( presumed ) bad news that is given to him . ( He now gets down to thinking ) whether he should keep her ( alive ) despite humiliation and disgrace or bury her ( alive ) in the earth . See ! How wicked is the decision that they make !
( This ) is the most evil attribute of those who do not believe in the Hereafter and the most exalted attribute is only Allahs . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And had Allah seized people ( instantly ) for their injustice , He would not have left any living being ( on the surface of the earth ) . But He grants them respite till an appointed term . When their fixed time arrives then they can neither advance nor hold it back for a single moment .
And they attribute to Allah what they loathe ( for themselves ) and their tongues utter falsehood that there is good for them . ( No indeed ! ) The truth is that for them there is Hell , and they will be the first ones to be sent ( into Hell where they shall be left forever ) .
By Allah ! We certainly sent Messengers to ( many ) people before you ( also ) . Then Satan made their ( evil ) deeds look attractive and pleasing to them . So the same ( Satan ) is today their friend . And for them there is painful punishment .
And We have not revealed to you the Book except that you may explain those ( matters ) clearly to them in which they differ , and ( also that this Book ) is guidance and mercy for the people that have embraced faith .
And Allah pours down water from the sky and by means of that brings the earth to life ( i . e . makes it fertile and green ) after it has become dead ( i . e . barren and infertile ) . Surely there is in it a Sign for those who give ear ( to advice ) .
And indeed in the cattle ( too ) there is a point for you to ponder . We provide you with pure milk to drink brought forth from that substance of their bellies ( which is produced by ) compounding ( certain ) intestinal contents and blood and which freshens up those who drink it .
And you obtain sugar and ( other ) fine foods from the fruits of date - palms and grapes . Indeed there is a Sign in it for those who have reason .
And your Lord seeded ( the idea instinctually ) in the honeybees heart : Make your hives in certain mountains and certain trees and ( also ) in certain projections which people build aloft ( like roofs ) .
So , suck the juice of all kinds of fruit and then follow those routes ( suggested ) by your Lord ( which lead to these fruits and flowers of which you are to suck the juice , leading other bees also to the source ) for their convenience . There oozes from their bellies a syrup ( that is honey ) of diverse colours . It has healing properties for the people . Therein is indeed a Sign for those who apply their minds .
And Allah has brought you into being ; then He causes you to die ( i . e . takes your life ) ; and He turns some of you to the most worthless age ( senility ) so that after knowing ( so much in life ) he should now know nothing ( i . e . man may see to his helplessness and paucity of resources before death ) . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And Allah has preferred some of you to others in ( grades of ) provision , ( so that He may bring you to trial through the command of spending in His way ) . But those who have been preferred do not divert ( even a portion of ) their wealth to ( i . e . do not spend on ) their dependants while they all are equal in it ( as for as their basic necessities are concerned ) . So do they deny Allahs favour ?
And Allah has created for you spouses from among yourselves , and has created through your mates ( wives ) sons and grandsons and provided you with pure sustenance . Do they still believe in falsehood ( abandoning the Truth ) and disregard Allahs favours ?
And besides Allah they worship those ( idols ) who are helpless to provide them with any provision from the heavens and the earth , and nor do they have any power .
So never put forward any similitude about Allah . Surely Allah knows and you do not .
Allah has explained an example ( that ) there is a slave , possessed by ( some master ) , having no control over anything ( himself ) ; and ( the other ) is the one We have given the best provision , so he gives out to others out of it secretly and openly : can the two be held equal ? All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know ( even the basic reality ) .
And Allah has illustrated an example of two ( such ) men of whom one is dumb , has no power over anything and is a burden on his master ; wherever he ( the master ) sends him , he brings no good . Can he ( the dumb ) be the equal to the ( other ) one who ( holds such an office that he ) enjoins the people to do justice , and he himself also follows the straight path ?
And to Allah belongs ( all ) the unseen of the heavens and the earth and the advent of the Last Hour will be as quick as twinkling of an eye or even faster . Surely Allah has Mighty Control over everything .
And Allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers ( in such a state ) that you knew nothing , and He endowed you with ears and eyes and hearts so that you may give thanks .
Have they not seen the birds that fly aloft in the air ( under the law of motion and aerodynamics ) ? Nothing but ( the laws of ) Allah hold them ( in the sky ) . Surely there are Signs in ( this law of aerodynamics ) for the believers .
And Allah has made your homes ( permanent ) places for you to reside and made for you ( temporary ) dwellings ( i . e . tents ) with the skins of cattle which you find light enough during your journey and for ( stay at journey - breaking ) halts . And ( Allah is the One Who ) provides you with household goods and profitable means ( in business and trade ) from the wool of sheep and lambs and fur of camels and hair obtained from goats , ( which are ) for an appointed term .
And Allah is the One Who has made for you shades of many things that He created , and He has made places of shelter for you in the mountains , and He has made ( some ) such clothes for you as protect you from heat and ( others like ) coats of armour which shield you ( against the enemy assault ) during the event of intense war . Thus Allah perfects His favour and blessing ( provision and protection ) upon you so that you may bow down ( before His Presence ) with absolute submissiveness .
So if ( even then ) they turn away ( O Glorious Messenger , ) then your responsibility is only to convey and communicate ( My Message and My Commands ) clearly .
They recognize Allahs favour , then deny it and most of them are disbelievers .
And the Day when We shall raise from every people ( their Messenger as ) a witness ( to their deeds ) , then the disbelievers will not be accorded permission ( to put forward any excuse ) , nor will they be asked ( then ) to turn to Allah in repentance .
And when the wrongdoers see the torment , neither will ( this torment ) be mitigated for them , nor will they be granted any respite .
And when the idolaters see their ( self - made ) partners , they will say : O our Lord , these are our partner - gods which we worshipped besides You . Thereupon those ( partner - gods ) will send them the message ( in reply ) : You are liars indeed .
And that Day these ( polytheists ) will show humbleness and obedience to Allah , and all falsehood that they used to fabricate will vanish from them .
Those who disbelieved and kept hindering ( others ) from the path of Allah , We shall add torment to their torment because they used to spread mischief and spoil peace .
And ( this ) will be the Day ( when ) We shall raise in every people one witness against them from among themselves , and , ( O Venerable Beloved , ) We shall bring you as witness to all of them ( communities and Messengers ) . And We have revealed to you that Glorious Book which is a clear exposition of everything and is guidance , mercy and glad tidings for the believers .
Indeed Allah enjoins justice and benevolence ( towards everyone ) , and giving away to the kindred and forbids indecency , evil deeds , defiance and disobedience . He admonishes you so that you may remember with concern .
And always fulfil the promise of Allah when you promise , and do not break oaths after making them firm while you have already made Allah a surety over you . Surely Allah knows well whatever you do .
And do not be like the woman who after spinning her yarn firm and strong breaks it into pieces . You employ your oaths as a means of deceiving among you so that ( by this ) one party may earn more profit than the other . The matter is that Allah ( also ) puts you to trial through the same , and on the Day of Resurrection He will certainly make clear those matters in which you used to disagree .
And had Allah so willed He would have made ( all ) of you one Umma ( Community ) but He holds strayed whom He wills and leads to guidance whom He wills . And you will surely be asked about the deeds you used to do .
And do not use your oaths as a means of deceiving among you lest your foot should quiver after it is set firmly ( in Islam ) and you will taste the evil result because you used to hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah . And there is severe torment for you .
And do not barter the promise made to Allah for a paltry price ( i . e . worldly wealth and gains ) . Surely ( the reward ) that is with Allah is best for you if you know ( this secret ) .
The ( riches ) that you possess will be no more and what is with Allah will last . And those who remain steadfast We shall certainly pay their recompense for their righteous deeds which they used to do .
Whoever performs pious works , man or woman provided he or she is a believer , We will surely let such a one live a life of purity and will indeed reward them ( as well ) their wage of the righteous works which they used to do .
So when you undertake to recite the Quran , seek refuge with Allah against ( the wiles of ) Satan , the outcast .
Surely he has no control ( at all ) over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord .
He overpowers only those who make friends with him and who associate partners with Allah .
And when We substitute some Verse in place of another Verse , and Allah ( alone ) knows best whatever He sends down , ( then ) the disbelievers say : You are but a forger ! But most of them do not know ( the rationale of sending down and substituting the verses ) .
Say : The Holy Spirit ( Gabriel ) has brought it ( the Quran ) down from your Lord with truth so as to keep the believers firm - footed and ( this ) is guidance and good news for the believers .
And indeed We know that they ( the disbelievers and the polytheists ) say : It is but a human being who teaches him this ( Quran ) . But the person they point to , turning the matter away from the truth , is the one whose language is non - Arabic and this Quran is ( in ) clear and unambiguous Arabic language .
Surely those who do not believe in the Revelations of Allah , Allah does not provide them with guidance ( i . e . does not also enable them with understanding and insight ) . And for them is grievous torment .
Indeed they alone invent false fabrications who do not believe in the Revelations of Allah and they alone are liars .
The one who disbelieves after having believed , except someone who is coercively forced to do so and at heart remains contented with belief ( as before ) , but ( of course ) he who ( adopts ) disbelief ( afresh ) wholeheartedly with an open mind , on them is wrath from Allah and for them is fierce torment .
That is because they loved and preferred the life of this world to the Hereafter and because Allah does not guide the disbelieving folk .
They are those whose hearts and whose ears and whose eyes Allah has sealed and they are the ones who are neglectful ( of their end in the Hereafter ) .
It is a fact that these are certainly those who are the losers in the Hereafter .
Then your Lord , for those who emigrated ( i . e . left their homes and towns for the cause of Allah ) after they had been made to suffer from trials ( and adversities ) , then fought in the way of Allah and remained steadfast ( in the face of worries ) ; after that , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( recall the time ) that Day when every person will appear pleading for himself ( in his defence ) , and every soul will be given full recompense for whatever it will have done , and they will not be wronged in the least .
And Allah has described the example of a township which was ( living ) in peace and contentment . The means of sustenance came to ( its residents ) in abundance from all quarters . Then the ( dwellers ) of this town disregarded Allahs blessings and showed ingratitude . Thereupon Allah clothed them in the torment of hunger and fear due to the activities that they used to carry out .
And indeed there came to them from among themselves a Messenger but they denied him . So the torment seized them and they were certainly the wrongdoers .
So always eat of that clean and lawful sustenance which Allah has given you and thank for the favour of Allah if you worship but Him alone .
He has forbidden you only carrion , blood , the flesh of swine and ( the animal ) on which the name of other than Allah is invoked at the time of slaughter . But he who is faced with survival condition ( forced by necessity ) , neither defying ( against Allahs injunctions seeking taste of lust ) , nor transgressing ( the limit of necessity ) , then Allah is surely Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And do not tell a lie which your tongues utter : This is lawful and that is forbidden , thus fabricating a lie against Allah . Indeed those who fabricate lies against Allah will ( never ) be delivered .
There is only a little profit but the torment for them is painful ( beyond proportion ) .
And We made unlawful for the Jews the same things that We have mentioned to you before and We did not wrong them but they used to wrong their souls themselves .
Indeed your Lord , for those who committed wrongs out of ignorance , then turned to Him in repentance and amended ( their ) state , then surely after that your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Surely Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was an Umma ( [ Community ] in himself ) , exclusively obedient to Allah , turning away from all falsehood ( ever inclined and given to Him alone ) and was not of those who associate partners with Allah .
Grateful to ( Allah ) for His blessings . Allah chose him ( and exalted him to a high office in His Presence ) and guided him to the straight path .
And We bestowed upon him good in this world , and he will surely be of the upright in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Then , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) We sent down Revelation to you : Follow Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , who was at variance with every falsehood and was not of those who associate partners with Allah .
Saturday ( the Sabbath ) was ordained only for those who differed about it , and indeed your Lord will judge among them on the Day of Resurrection ( in the matters ) in which they used to differ .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Invite towards the path of your Lord with strategic wisdom and refined exhortation and ( also ) argue with them in a most decent manner . Surely your Lord knows him well who strayed away from His path and He also knows well the rightly guided .
And if you want to punish , then punish only ( as severely ) as you were afflicted , but if you remain patient then certainly that is better for those who keep patience .
And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) be patient and your patience is by Allah alone . And you should not grieve over their ( defiance ) , nor distress ( your gracious and benevolent heart ) on account of their deceptive plots .
Surely Allah blesses them with His ( special ) companionship who live with Godwariness and who ( also ) live with spiritual excellence .
Holy ( free of any imperfection , weakness and insufficiency ) is He Who took His ( most beloved and intimate ) Servant in a small portion of a night from the Sacred Mosque to the al - Aqsa Mosque , whose surroundings We have blessed , in order that We might show him ( the Perfect Servant ) Our Signs . Surely He is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( the Torah ) and made it guidance for the Children of Israel ( and enjoined them : ) Do not take anyone other than Me as Guardian .
( O ) children of those whom We carried ( in the Ark ) with Nuh ( Noah ) ! Indeed Nuh ( Noah ) was a highly grateful servant .
And We categorically conveyed to the Children of Israel in the Book : You shall make mischief twice in the land and employ a violent defiance ( against obedience to Allah ) .
So when the promised first time of the two came to pass We brought upon you those of Our servants who were great warriors . Then , in ( your ) search they penetrated up to your dwellings . And ( this ) promise was sure to be fulfilled .
Then We turned the victory over them to your favour and helped you with ( affluence in ) wealth and children and increased your numerical strength ( as well ) .
If you do good , you do it ( only ) for your own benefit but if you do evil , you will sin against your own souls . Then , when the hour of second promise came ( We sent against you other tyrants ) so that , ( lashing and whipping , ) they should deform your faces and enter the al - Aqsa Mosque ( the same way ) as ( the invaders ) had entered it the first time and so that they completely destroy whatever ( place ) they overpower .
It may well be that ( after this ) your Lord will have mercy on you , but if you revert to the same ( rebellious and defiant behaviour ) , then We too will get back to the same ( tormenting once again ) . And We have made Hell a prison for the disbelievers .
Indeed this Quran leads to that ( destination ) which is most right , and gives this good news to those believers who do righteous works , that for them is a mighty reward .
And that those who do not believe in the Hereafter , We have prepared for them painful punishment .
And ( intolerant and anguished ) man prays ( sometimes ) for evil as he prays for good ( for himself ) . And man has happened to be very impulsive indeed .
And We have made the night and the day two Signs ( of Our Might ) . Then We made the Sign of the night dark and We made the Sign of the day bright so that you may look for your Lords bounty ( provision ) and that you may work out the number of years and do reckoning and We have made everything clear in detail .
And We have slung every mans record of deeds around his neck , and on the Day of Resurrection We shall bring forth ( this ) record which he will find spread out ( before him ) .
( It will be said to him : ) Read your book ( of deeds ) . Today you yourself are enough for examining your own account .
Whoever adopts the path of guidance follows it to his own benefit and whoever goes astray , then evil consequences of his error also fall back on him alone . And no bearer of burden will bear the burden ( of the sins ) of any other . And We do not torment ( any people ) at all until We send a Messenger ( to them ) .
And when We resolve to destroy a town , We send ( some ) command to the rich and the affluent among them ( so that the common man and the poor too may make amends ) but they act disobediently in ( the town ) . Thus Our decree ( of torment ) becomes due against it . Then We totally smash that town .
And how many a community have We destroyed after Nuh ( Noah ) ! And your Lord is Sufficient . ( He ) is Well Aware of the sins of His servants , All - Seeing .
Whoever longs for ( quick recompense for his labour in the form of ) worldly riches alone , We readily grant whatever We like to whoever We please , here in this world . Thereafter , We have set up Hell for him which he will enter hearing condemnation and contempt , rejected ( from the mercy of his Lord ) .
And whoever longs for the Hereafter and toils for it befittingly and he is a believer ( as well ) , it is they whose struggle will earn recognition .
We extend help to all : those ( ambitious of this world ) as well as those ( aspiring to the Hereafter . O Glorious Beloved , all this ) is of your Lords Bestowal . And the Bestowal of your Lord is not forbidden ( to ) and restricted ( to anyone ) .
See how We have exalted some of them above the others ! And surely the Hereafter ( as compared to this world ) is far greater in terms of degrees and in terms of superiority ( as well ) .
( O listener ! ) Do not set up another god along with Allah ( lest ) you should sit back condemned ( and ) forsaken .
And your Lord has commanded you not to worship anyone other than Allah and treat the parents with benevolence . If either or both of them attain to old age in your presence , then do not say even Ugh ! to them nor reproach them . And always speak to both of them submissively , observing polite manners .
And always lower your arms of submissiveness and humility out of soft - heartedness for both of them and keep supplicating ( Allah ) : O my Lord , have mercy on both of them as they brought me up in ( my ) childhood ( with mercy and clemency ) .
Your Lord is well aware of the ( matters and intentions ) that are in your hearts . If you acquire righteous conduct then surely He ( Allah ) is Most Forgiving to those who turn ( towards Him ) .
And give to the kindred their rightful due and also ( give ) to the needy and the wayfarer and do not exhaust ( your wealth ) by expending wastefully .
Surely the spendthrifts are the brothers of Satan , and Satan is most ungrateful to his Lord .
And if , in waiting for your Lords mercy ( i . e . prosperity ) which you look forward to , you seek to avoid these ( deserving ones due to scarcity of means ) , then say to them kind words .
And neither keep your hand tied to your neck ( giving nothing to anyone ) nor stretch it wide open ( giving away all ) lest you should sit back blamed ( and ) consumed .
Truly your Lord opens up sustenance for whom He pleases and folds up ( for whom He wills ) . Verily , He is All - Knowing of His servants ( works and affairs ) , All - Seeing .
And do not kill your children due to fear of poverty . We alone provide for them and for you ( as well ) . Indeed killing them is a major sin .
And do not even go near unlawful sex ( adultery ) . Verily it is an act of lewdness and is the most evil way .
Do not kill any soul whose ( killing ) Allah has declared unlawful unless ( killing him ) is just ( according to the law of Sharia ) . But whoever is killed unjustly , We have indeed given to his heir the right ( of retribution ) , but he too has not to exceed limits in killing ( by way of retribution ) . He is indeed helped ( by Allah . The responsibility of his help and support will be on the government . )
And do not ( also ) go near the orphans property but in a way that is beneficial ( to the orphan ) until he reaches his maturity . And do fulfil the promise . No doubt the promise will be questioned about .
And measure in full whenever you measure out ( anything ) , and ( when you weigh anything ) weigh with a straight balance . This ( honesty ) is better and much better with regard to its consequence ( as well ) .
And , ( O man , ) do not follow that of which you have no ( authentic ) knowledge . Indeed the ear , the eye and the heart each of them will be questioned .
And do not walk arrogantly on earth . Certainly you cannot cleave the earth ( with the force of your arrogance ) , nor can you reach the mountains in height . ( You will remain what you are . )
The evil of all these ( mentioned ) acts is most despicable to your Lord .
This is of those wisdom - loaded values which your Lord has revealed to you and , ( O man , ) do not set up another god with Allah ( lest ) you should be cast into Hell cursed ( and ) rejected ( from Allahs Mercy ) .
( O idolaters ! Think for yourselves ! ) Has your Lord picked you for sons and taken ( for Himself ) angels as daughters ? Indeed you utter a most awful saying ( in the framework of your own fabricated ideas ) .
And surely We have explained ( facts and admonitions ) in this Quran repeatedly and alternating styles so that people may take direction and guidance , but ( the disbelievers state of mind is such that ) this only increases their hatred .
Say : Had there been some other gods with Him , as they ( the idolaters and the disbelievers ) say , then they would certainly have ( jointly ) found some passage to reach the Lord of the Throne ( to interfere in His Command and Control System ) .
Holy is He and Most Exalted and Most High , far above all that they keep saying .
The seven heavens and the earth and all that exists in them persistently extol the Glory of Allah and there is not a single object ( in the entire universe ) but it glorifies Him with His Praise . Yet you cannot appreciate their ( state of ) glorification . He is surely Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And when you recite the Quran , ( then ) We place an imperceptible veil between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter .
And We ( also ) cover their hearts in wrappers so that they may ( not ) get to its meaning and plug their ears with a sensation of heaviness ( so that they may not listen to it ) . And when you mention your Lord alone in the Quran ( and the names of their idols are not mentioned ) then , in extreme dislike , they turn their backs and flee away .
We know best the motive with which they listen to with active attention when they give you ears , and when they whisper and when these wrongdoers say ( to the Muslims ) : You are following only a person that is bewitched ( i . e . a spell has been cast on him . And We see and hear all this ) .
( O Beloved ! ) See what similes ( these people ) find for you ! So they have gone astray . Now they are unable to find a way to the right path .
And they say : When we shall become ( decomposed ) bones and dust particles ( after dying ) , shall we be raised up alive anew ?
Say : ( Yes , even though ) be you stones or iron .
Or any other created matter which you deem even harder ( than these things and which is not susceptible to becoming a living thing ) . Then ( in this condition ) they will say : Who will bring us back to life ? Say : He Who created you the first time . They will then shake their heads at you ( by way of wonder and ridicule ) and will say : When will it happen ? Say : It is expected to occur soon .
The Day when He will call you , you will respond praising Him , deeming that you tarried ( in the world ) for only a short while .
And tell My servants that they should say things that are most balanced . Surely Satan causes contention among people . Indeed Satan is mans declared enemy .
Your Lord is well aware of your state of affairs . If He wills , He may have mercy on you or if He likes , He may torment you . And We have not sent you as a guardian over them ( to care for all their matters ) .
And your Lord knows them best who ( live ) in the heavens and the earth . And surely We exalted some Messengers above the others and bestowed the Zabur ( Psalms ) upon Dawud ( David ) .
Say : Call all those that you consider ( gods ) apart from Allah . They do not have the power to remove distress from you , nor ( have they the capability ) to shift ( it to others ) .
Those that they worship ( i . e . they prepare sculptures and images of angels , jinn , the Prophets Isa [ Jesus ] , Uzair [ Ezra ] and others and worship them ) look for mediation to their Lord ( themselves ) as to who among them is most intimate ( in the Presence of Allah ) . And ( they ( themselves ) hope for His mercy and fear His torment . ( Now say yourselves how they can be gods . They are prostrating themselves before the True God . ) Indeed the torment of your Lord is a thing to fear .
And there is not a community ( comprising disbelievers and the denying rebels ) but We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection or afflict it with most severe torment . This ( decree ) is written in the Book ( the Protected Tablet [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And ( nothing ) has prevented Us from sending down the Signs ( on their demand even now ) except that the bygone people denied the same ( Signs . Thereupon , they were immediately seized by destruction and were not granted any respite . O Beloved , We do not want to repeat that with your people after We have raised you as Our Messenger . ) And We gave the people of Thamud an open Sign ( of ) a she - camel ( of Salih ) but they did her wrong . And We do not send Signs but to rouse fear ( for the last time before the torment arrives . Then , when that Sign is rejected , the devastating torment is sent forthwith ) .
And ( recall the time ) when We said to you : Indeed your Lord has encompassed ( all ) mankind ( within His knowledge and might ) . And We have made the vision ( on the Night of Ascension ) that We showed you but a trial for the people ; ( the believers believed in it while those having superficial vision got confused ; ) and also that tree ( of Zaqqum ) which has been cursed in the Quran . And We warn them but this ( warning too ) does not add anything to them except greater disobedience and rebelliousness .
And ( call to mind the time ) when We said to the angels : Fall down in prostration before Adam . Then all prostrated themselves except Iblis ( Satan ) . He said : Shall I prostrate myself before him whom You have created of clay .
( And Satan also said : ) Tell me , is it he You have exalted over me ? ( What is its reason after all ? ) If you grant me respite till the Day of Resurrection , I shall root out his children except a few of them ( by bringing them under my control ) .
Allah said : Go ( respite is granted to you ) . So whoever of them follows you , Hell indeed is the only befitting punishment for you all .
And whoever you can influence , destabilize ( him ) with your voice and invade them with ( all the forces at your disposal ) mounted and infantry troops , and become a partner with them in their wealth and children and make them ( false ) promises . And Satan does not make them ( any ) promises but fraud and deceit .
Assuredly you will not be able to overpower those who are My servants , and your Lord is Sufficient to protect and help these ( friends of Allah ) .
Your Lord is He Who makes ( the ships and ) vessels sail in the sea ( and rivers ) for you so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e sustenance through internal and external trade ) . Indeed He is Ever - Merciful towards you .
And when some adversity afflicts you in the sea , then ( all ) those ( idols ) disappear ( from your minds ) you keep worshipping apart from Him ( Allah Whom you remember at that time ) . Then when He rescues you and takes you safe ashore ( you once again ) start turning away ( from Him ) . And man has happened to be extremely thankless !
Do you feel free of this fear that He may sink you ( into the land ) right at the shore or may send to you stone storm ? Then you will not find any helper for yourselves .
Or have you become fearless that He may take you back once more ( into the sea ) and let loose upon you the ship - wrecking tempest and drown you ( into the sea ) because of your disbelief you used to practise . Then you will not find for yourselves anyone to impeach Us ( on this drowning ) .
And We have indeed honoured the children of Adam and provided them with ( means of transport ) over the land and in the sea ( i . e . in the cities , deserts , rivers and oceans ) and bestowed upon them sustenance out of clean and pure things . And We have exalted them above most of Our creation by conferring on them superiority .
( Call to mind ) the Day when We shall call every section of people along with their leaders . So whoever will be given the record of his deeds in his right hand , so they will read their records ( rejoicing ) and they will not be wronged a whit .
And whoever remains blind ( to the Truth ) in this ( world ) will be blind in the Hereafter as well , distracted from the path ( of deliverance ) .
And that is what the disbelievers were up to that they might tempt you away from that ( Commandment ) which We have revealed to you , so that you ascribe to Us some other ( things ) apart from this ( Revelation ) , and then make you their friend .
And had We not ( already ) made you firm - footed ( through holiness and impeccability of Prophethood ) , even then you ( owing to your holy and sanctified self and natural potential ) would have but trivially gone near to inclining towards them . ( You would not have even then bent much towards them and they would have failed . But Allah has protected you from even nearing such a probability through the holiness of Prophethood . )
( But if supposedly you inclined then ) We would make you taste double of the torment in the worldly life and double of the torment in death . You would not then find ( even ) for yourself any helper against Us .
And the disbelievers also sought to shake you off the land ( of Makka ) so that they might banish you from here . ( But had that supposedly happened ) then they ( themselves ) would also not have stayed there but for a little while .
This ( has been ) the practice ( of Allah ) with all those Messengers We sent before you and you will not find any change in Our Way .
Establish the Prayers ( Zuhr [ Midday ] , Asr [ Afternoon ] , Maghrib [ Sunset ] and Isha [ Evening ] ) from the declining of the sun till deep darkness of the night . And also ( make obligatory ) the recitation of Fajr Prayer , for the Quran in Fajr ( Dawn ) Prayer is attended ( by the angels and a state of divine consciousness also permeates ) .
And in some part of the night ( as well , rising from sleep , ) offer the Tahajjud Prayer with the Quran . This is added especially for you . Your Lord will certainly raise you to a station of praise and glory ( i . e . the glorious station of intercession where all the former and later generations will turn towards you and glorify you ) .
And keep praying ( to your Lord ) : O my Lord , make me enter ( wherever You are to make me enter ) with the Truth ( Your pleasure ) , and bring me out ( from wherever You are to bring me out ) with the Truth ( Your pleasure ) . And bestow upon me from Your Presence the dominance that assists and the power that backs .
And say : The Truth has come and falsehood has fled . Surely falsehood has to perish .
And We are sending down in the Quran what is healing and mercy for the believers . And it only increases the wrongdoers in loss .
And when We bestow upon man ( some ) blessing he turns away ( from gratitude ) and escapes , but when some distress comes upon him he despairs ( i . e . he is neither grateful nor patient ) .
Say : Everyone acts according to his own ( respective ) style and nature , and your Lord knows full well who is best guided to the straight path .
And they ( the disbelievers ) ask you about the spirit . Say : The spirit is from my Lords Command and you have been given but a very little knowledge .
And if We so will , We can erase this ( Book ) which We have revealed to you , ( from peoples minds and from the written copies , ) and you will not then find anyone who may plead your case before Us for the communication of this ( Revelation ) .
But that by your Lords Mercy ( We have kept it intact . This ) is indeed His mighty favour to you ( and through you to your Umma [ Community ] ) .
Say : Should all men and jinn join in the attempt to produce ( some other book ) the like of this Quran , ( even ) then they will not be able to produce the like thereof , though they may become supporters to one another .
And surely We have repeatedly explained for people every sort of example in this Quran ( in diverse ways ) , but most people have not accepted ( it . This is nothing ) but sheer ingratitude .
And they ( the disbelievers of Makka ) say : We shall never believe in you until you cause some water spring to gush out of the earth .
Or you have some garden of date - palms and grapes and you may cause streams to flow profusely therein .
Or , as you have an idea , cause some pieces of the sky to fall upon us ( just now ) or bring Allah and the angels before us .
Or you have a house of gold ( wherein you live luxuriously ) or you ascend up to heaven , but even then we will not believe in your ascension ( to the heaven ) until you bring down to us ( from there ) a Book which we may read ( ourselves ) . Say : Holy is my Lord ( far above these vagaries ) . I am only a human being ( and a Messenger ) sent by Allah .
And nothing prevented ( these ) people from believing , while there had come to them guidance ( as well ) , except that they said : Has Allah sent ( a ) man as Messenger ?
Say : Had there been angels ( instead of human beings ) walking about , residing in the earth , then We ( too ) would have certainly sent down from heaven some angel as a Messenger .
Say : Sufficient is Allah for a witness between me and you . Surely He is Well Aware of His servants , All - Seeing .
And he whom Allah guides , then he it is the rightly guided . But he whom He holds astray , you will not find for them any helper except Him . And We shall raise them on the Day of Resurrection prone , blind , dumb and deaf . Hell is their abode . Every time it abates We shall flare it more ablaze ( to torment them ) .
That is their punishment because they denied Our Revelations . And they kept saying : Shall we be raised alive afresh after ( we die ) reduced to ( decomposed ) bones and dust particles ?
Have they not seen that Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth does ( also ) have the power to create the like of these people ( again ) ? And He has fixed a term for them wherein there is no ( chance of ) doubt . The wrongdoers have even then refused to believe but ( this ) is ingratitude .
Say : If you were the owners of the treasures of my Lords Mercy , you would even then hold ( your hands ) back ( from spending ) for fear of ( total ) exhaustion . And man has turned out to be highly narrow - minded and niggardly .
And indeed We bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) nine bright Signs . And ask the Children of Israel , when ( Musa [ Moses ] ) came to them , Pharaoh said to him : O Musa ( Moses ) , in my opinion you are but a bewitched man ( a spell has been cast upon you ) .
Musa ( Moses ) replied : ( In your heart of hearts ) you know that none has sent down these Signs as a means of warning and insight except the Lord of the heavens and the earth and , O Pharaoh , in my opinion you are a wreck ( i . e . you are going to perish soon ) .
Then ( Pharaoh ) resolved to uproot and cast away ( Musa [ Moses ] and his people ) from the land of ( Egypt ) . So We drowned him and all those who were with him .
Then after this We said to the Children of Israel : Settle in this land . Then when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass We shall take you all mustered together .
And We have sent down this ( Quran ) with the Truth and it is with the Truth alone that it has come down . And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) We have sent you but as a Bearer of glad tidings and as a Warner .
And We sent down the Quran piecemeal so that you may recite it to the people distinctly with pauses . And We have revealed it piecemeal gradually ( in accordance with the circumstances and expediencies ) .
Say : Believe in it or not , indeed those who were given the knowledge ( of the Book ) before you , they fall down upon their faces in prostration when this ( Quran ) is recited to them .
And they say : Holy is our Lord . Surely the promise of our Lord was bound to come true .
And they fall down on their faces sighing and wailing , and this ( Quran ) increases on their fear and submissiveness ever more .
Say : Call out Allah or call out ar - Rahman ( the Most Compassionate ) , by whatever Name you invoke Him , ( all ) Best Names are His . And recite ( the Quran in ) your Prayer neither too loud nor too low but adopt a ( middle ) course in between the two .
And say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has neither taken any son ( for Himself ) nor is there any partner in ( His ) kingdom and regime and nor has He any aide due to any handicap . ( O Beloved , ) keep extolling His Greatness and Glory with conviction and magnify Him with all His magnificence .
All praise belongs to Allah Who revealed the ( Glorious ) Book to His ( Most Beloved and Intimate ) servant and left not in it any crookedness .
( He made it ) straight and moderate so that he may warn ( the disbelievers ) of fierce torment ( coming ) from Allah and give good news to the believers who do pious deeds that for them is excellent reward ( Paradise ) .
Wherein they will live forever .
And ( moreover ) create fear in those who say that Allah has taken a son ( for Himself ) .
Neither they have any knowledge of it nor had their fathers . How dreadful is ( this ) utterance that is coming out of their mouths ! They speak nothing but ( sheer ) falsehood .
( O Venerable Beloved ! ) Will you put your ( dear ) life at stake with the traumatic grief for them if they do not put faith in this Word ( of Allah ) ?
And indeed We have made whatever is on earth a means of its beauty ( and adornment ) so that We test ( the inhabitants of the earth ) as to who is better on merit of their deeds .
And , surely , We shall reduce it to a barren land ( perishing all ) that is on ( the surface of the earth ) .
Have you thought of it ( how ) wondrous a Sign of the Signs ( of Our Might ) were the people of the Kahf and the Raqim ( i . e . the people of Cave and the Cave Tablet or the Raqim valley ) ?
( Call to mind the time ) when a few youths took refuge in the cave . They said : O our Lord , bestow upon us mercy from Your Presence and provide ( means of ) guidance in our affair .
So We patted their ears ( putting them to slumber ) for some countable years in that cave .
Then We raised them up to see which of the two groups would most rightly calculate ( the time ) that they stayed ( in the cave ) .
We ( now ) narrate to you their actual state of affairs . They were indeed ( a few ) young men who believed in their Lord and We increased for them ( the light of ) guidance .
And We strengthened and stabilized their hearts ( through Our communication and divine affinity ) . When they stood ( before their king ) , they said : Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth . We shall never worship any ( false ) god besides Him . ( If we do that ) then we shall certainly say something profane .
These are the people of our community who have made many gods apart from Him . Why do they not bring any clear proof ( in support of their godhood ) ? So , who is a greater wrongdoer than he who fabricates a lie against Allah ?
And ( those young men mutually discussed : ) When you have withdrawn yourselves from them and those ( false gods ) which they worship other than Allah , take shelter in ( this ) cave . Your Lord will open up His mercy for you and will facilitate you in your affair .
And you see that the sun , when it rises , moves to the right from their cave and inclines obliquely from them to the left when it sets while they are ( lying ) in the open chamber of the cave . This ( change of the suns course ) is one of the ( great ) Signs of Allahs ( Might ) . He whom Allah guides is the one who is rightly guided , but one whom He holds strayed you will not find for him any wali ( friend to help ) and murshid ( guide to show the path ) .
And , ( O listener , ) if you ( look ) at them , you will deem them awake whereas they are asleep . And We keep changing their sides to the right and to the left ( after regular intervals ) , and their dog is sitting on ( their ) threshold sprawling both its forelegs . Had you glanced peeping at them , you would have run away turning your back on them , and your heart would have been filled with their terror .
And likewise We raised them up so that they could probe among themselves . ( So , ) the vocal one among them said : How long have you stayed ( here ) ? They said : We have tarried ( here ) for a day or ( even ) a part of that . ( Winding it up , they ) said : Your Lord knows best how long you have stayed ( here ) . So send someone of you to the city with this coin of yours . He should then find which food is more lawful and clean and bring you some of that . He should remain slow and polite ( in going , buying and coming back ) , not leaving any clue about you ( even ) to a single person .
Surely if they overpower you ( after becoming aware of you ) , they will surely stone you to death or force you ( through oppression ) to return to their faith . And ( if it so happens ) then you will not prosper at all .
And in this way We unveiled their ( state ) to those ( who succeeded them some centuries later ) so that they might know that Allahs promise is true and ( also ) that there is no doubt about the coming of the Last Hour . ( When these people of the cave died ) and the people of the town developed a dispute concerning their matter , they said : Raise a building over their ( cave as a monument ) . Their Lord knows best their state of ( saintly ) affairs . Those ( believers ) who had the upper hand in their matter said : We shall certainly build a mosque ( at their door so that the believers may pray therein and acquire special bounty by obtaining spiritual nearness to the people of the cave ) .
( Now ) some will say : ( The people of the cave ) were three and the fourth was their dog , and still some will say : ( They ) were five and the sixth was their dog . These are the estimations made without seeing . And others will say : ( They ) were seven and the eighth was their dog . Say : My Lord is the One Who exactly knows their number and none knows their ( exact number ) except a few . So do not discuss about them with anyone except the details that have been revealed . Nor seek any information from any of them ( about the people of the Cave ) .
And never say about anything : I shall do this work tomorrow .
But that : If Allah so wills . ( i . e . saying : Insha Allah ) . And remember your Lord when you forget and say : I believe my Lord will show me the path of guidance which is ( even ) nearer than this one .
And ( the people of the Cave [ Kahf ] ) stayed in their cave for three hundred years and they added another ( nine ) years ( to that ) .
Say : Allah is the One Who knows best for how long they remained ( there ) . He alone knows ( all ) the secrets of the heavens and the earth . How well He sees and how well He hears ! They have no protector besides Him , nor does He share His Sovereignty with anyone .
And recite that ( Revelation ) which has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord . There is none who can change His Word , nor will you find any place of refuge except with Him .
( O My servant ! ) Stay tenaciously in the companionship of those who remember their Lord morning and evening , ardently seeking His pleasure , ( keen on the glimpse of His sight and eagerly aspiring to glance at His radiant Countenance ) . Your ( affectionate and caring ) looks must not but focus them . Do you seek the charisma of the worldly life ( shifting your attention away from these self - denying devotees ) ? And ( also ) do not follow him whose heart We have made neglectful of Our remembrance and who follows but the urge of his ( ill - commanding self ) and his case has exceeded all bounds .
And say : ( This ) Truth is from your Lord . So whoever desires may believe and whoever desires may deny . Indeed We have prepared for the wrongdoers the Fire ( of Hell ) whose walls will surround them . And if ( due to thirst and distress ) they cry , they will be helped with water like molten copper which will scald their faces . How dreadful a drink and how terrible a resting place !
Indeed those who believe and do pious deeds , We certainly do not waste his reward who does pious deeds .
For them there are ( everlasting ) Gardens with streams flowing under their ( palaces ) . They will be adorned with bracelets of gold in these Gardens , and they will wear green attires of fine brocade and heavy silk . And there they will recline upon raised and richly adorned thrones . What an excellent reward and how beautiful a resting place !
And relate to them the example of two men , one of whom We provided with two gardens of grapevines , and We hedged both from all sides with date - palms and We grew between them ( rich green ) cultivated fields .
Both these gardens yielded ( abundant ) fruits and their ( produce ) did not fall short of the mark . And We ( also ) made one stream flow in the middle of ( each of ) the two .
And this man had ( also besides this ) abundant fruits ( i . e . resources ) . While exchanging views with his companion , he said to him : I am far more affluent than you and ( also ) more honourable as regards family and tribal strength .
And ( taking him along ) he entered his garden . Doing wrong to his soul ( by way of arrogance ) , he said : I do not ( even ) imagine that this garden will perish .
Nor do I entertain the idea that the Last Hour will take place . And if ( supposedly ) I am returned to my Lord , even then I shall certainly get a place to return better than these gardens .
His companion , while exchanging views with him , said to him : Have you denied ( the Lord ) Who has created you ( first ) from clay and then from a drop of vital fluid and then accomplished you ( physically ) into a full - grown man ?
But ( this is what ) I say : Allah alone is my Lord and I do not associate any partner with my Lord .
And why did you not say when you entered your garden : Ma Sha Allah , la quwwata illa bi - llah ( It happens exactly as Allah wills . No one owns any power but with the help of Allah ) ? If ( today ) you find me inferior to you in wealth and riches ( then what ! )
It is not far from possible that my Lord may give me a garden better than yours and send from heaven some torment upon this ( garden ) turning it into a barren slippery piece of land .
Or its water may sink so deep into the earth that it gets beyond your means to fetch .
And ( because of his arrogance ) all his fruits were besieged ( with destruction ) and in the morning he was but wringing his hands with grief bewailing all that wealth which he had invested ( in raising this garden ) . And the garden had fallen down on its trellises and he ( the embodiment of despair and despondence ) said : Would that I had not attributed peers to Allah ( and had not employed self - conceit ) !
And there was ( also ) no party for him to come to his help against Allah , nor was he himself able to avenge ( this destruction ) .
( Here it becomes evident ) that all authority belongs to Allah alone ( Who ) is the Truth . He is the Best to reward and the Best to end .
And explain to them the example of the worldly life ( as well ) : it is like water that We pour from the sky . With this the vegetation of the earth grows thick , but then it becomes dry stubble which the winds blow about and Allah has Perfect Control over everything .
Wealth and children are ( mere ) adornment of the worldly life , but the things that ( actually ) endure ( are ) the good deeds ( which ) are best in the Sight of your Lord as for reward and ( also ) most valuable as regards hope .
That will be the Day ( of Resurrection ) when We shall move the mountains ( in the atmosphere , broken to dust particles , ) and you will see the earth as a clear plain ( void of plantation , stones , animals and vegetation ) . And We shall gather together the whole of mankind and shall not leave out anyone of them .
And ( all ) mankind will be presented to your Lord standing in rows . ( It will be said to them : ) Indeed you have come to Us ( Today the way ) We created you for the first time . In fact you thought that We would never appoint for you the Hour of Promise .
And the record of deeds will be placed ( before everyone ) . So , you will see the evildoers terrified at the ( sins , wrongs and offences ) registered ( in the record ) . And they will say : Oh , woe to us ! What is the matter with this record that it has left out neither any insignificant ( wrong ) nor any big ( blunder ) . It has rather taken into account ( each and every act ) . And they will find ( before them ) whatever they used to do , and your Lord will not do injustice to anyone .
And ( recall the time ) when We said to the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam ( in veneration ) . So they all prostrated themselves except Iblis . He ( Iblis ) was of the jinn and he walked out of the obedience to his Lord . Are you taking him and his offspring for friends leaving Me whereas in truth they are your enemies ? How evil a substitute the evildoers ( have opted in My place ) !
I called them neither ( for assistance or witness ) on the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor ( at the time of ) their own creation . Nor was it My Glory to take the inciters of misguidance as ( My ) supporters .
And ( remember ) the Day ( when ) Allah will say : Call those that you deemed to be My peers . So they will call them but they will not give them any answer , and We shall place between them ( a valley of Hell ) , the site of destruction .
And the evildoers will see the Fire of Hell and realize that certainly they are about to fall into it . And they will not be able to find any means to escape from it .
And We have indeed put forth in the Quran repeatedly for mankind every kind of example ( alternating the styles ) but man is far ahead in contention than anything else .
And nothing prevented the people from embracing faith and imploring forgiveness from their Lord , while guidance had reached them , except ( waiting for ) the pattern of the ancients ( destruction ) occurring to them or that the torment should come in front of them .
And We do not send Messengers but as Bearers of glad tidings ( to the people ) and as Warners . And the disbelievers dispute with ( these Messengers ) taking leverage of false arguments so as to eliminate the Truth with ( falsehood ) . And they scoff at My Revelations and the ( torment ) of which they are warned .
And who is a greater wrongdoer than one who was reminded of the Signs of Allah but he turned away from them and forgot those ( evil deeds ) which his hands had sent forward ? Verily We have cast veils over their hearts so that they may ( not ) understand this Truth and have plugged their ears with heaviness ( so that they may not hear this Truth ) . And if you invite them towards guidance , never ever will they take guidance .
And your Lord is Most Forgiving , Full of Mercy . If He had to take them to task for their doings , He would certainly have sent the torment upon them quickly . And in truth the Hour of Promise is ( appointed ) for them . ( When that time comes ) they will not find any place of shelter except with Him .
And these are the towns whose inhabitants We destroyed when they perpetrated oppression and injustice . And We had fixed a time for their destruction .
( And also call to mind the incident ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his ( young companion and ) servant ( Yusha ibn Nun [ Joshua ] the son of Nun ) : I will not step ( back ) until I arrive at the junction of the two seas or I travel on infinitely .
So when both of them reached the junction of the two seas , they forgot their fish ( there ) . So , that ( fried fish came back to life and ) made its way into the sea like a tunnel and slipped off .
Then , when both of them had gone ahead , Musa ( Moses ) asked his servant : Bring us our meal . Surely we have faced great hardship during our this journey .
( The servant ) said : Did you see when we reposed beside the rock ? I forgot the fish ( there ) and none but Satan made me forget to mention it to you . And that fish ( after coming back to life ) made its way into the sea in a strange way ( and it disappeared ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said : That is the place we were looking for . So both returned to ( the same place ) , tracing the ( same track ) following their footsteps .
Then both found ( there ) one of Our ( elite ) servants ( Khidr ) upon whom We had bestowed from Our Presence ( special ) mercy and had taught him infused knowledge ( i . e . the inspired knowledge of secrets and Gnostics ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said to him : Can I stay with you under this ( condition ) that you will teach me ( as well ) some of that knowledge which has been conferred on you for guidance .
He ( i . e . Khidr ) said : No doubt , you will not be able to have patience being in my company .
And how can you observe patience in ( the matter of ) which you will not have acquired ( thorough ) knowledge ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : You will certainly find me patient , if Allah so pleases , and I will not violate any of your instructions .
( Khidr ) said : So if you are in my company then do not question me about any thing until I myself mention that to you .
So both of them set out till , when they embarked on a boat , ( Khidr ) bored a hole in it . Musa ( Moses ) said : Have you bored ( a hole in ) it to drown the people aboard ? Surely you have done something strange .
( Khidr ) said : Did I not tell you that you would not be able to restrain yourself in my company ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : Call me not to account for my omission and put me not in any more difficulty in ( this ) affair of mine .
Then both of them proceeded till they met a boy . ( Khidr ) killed him . Musa ( Moses ) said : Have you killed an innocent soul without any ( retribution due ) for anyone killed ? Indeed you have done a horrible thing .
( Khidr ) said : Did I not tell you that you would never be able to keep patience in my company ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : If I ask you about anything after this , then do not keep me with you . Indeed , in my opinion , you have reached the limit to excuse .
Then both set off , until they reached the people of a town ; both asked its residents for food but they refused to entertain them . Then they found there a wall which was about to fall . ( Khidr ) erected it . Musa ( Moses ) said : If you desired , you could take wages for this ( construction work ) .
( Khidr ) said : This is the parting ( time ) between me and you . Now I impart to you the truth of the matters about which you have not been able to keep patience .
As for the boat , that belonged to some poor people who used to toil for wages on the river . So I decided to make it defective ( because ) a ( cruel ) king was ( standing ) ahead of them , snatching every ( undamaged ) boat by force ( from the owners without any compensation ) .
And as for the boy , his parents were blessed with faith . So we feared that ( if he lived on he would become a disbeliever , and on attaining to maturity ) he would afflict both of them with disobedience and disbelief .
So we intended that their Lord might bless them with ( such ) a substitute as would be better than this ( boy ) in purity and nearer ( to his parents as well ) in clemency and kindness .
And as for the wall , that belonged to two orphan boys ( residing ) in the town . And a treasure was ( buried ) beneath it for both of them . And their father was ( a ) pious ( man ) . So your Lord willed that both of them should reach their age of maturity and dig out their treasure ( themselves ) by Mercy from your Lord . And I did not do ( whatever I did ) of my own accord . This is the truth ( of the matters ) about which you could not hold yourself .
And , ( O Most Esteemed Beloved , ) they ask you about Dhul - Qarnain . Say : I recite to you an account of him now .
( In ancient times ) We did grant him power in the land and blessed ( his regime ) with all the means and resources .
Then he took ( another ) way .
Until he reached the boundary of ( a locality towards ) the West where he perceived the setting of the sun as if going down into a spring of ( muddy black ) hot water , and he found a people ( living ) there . We said : O Dhul - Qarnain , ( it is up to you ) whether you punish them or treat them nicely .
Dhul - Qarnain said : Whoever perpetrates injustice ( by way of disbelief and mischief - mongering ) we will certainly punish him . He will then be brought back to his Lord . And then He will award him most grievous punishment .
And whoever believes and does pious acts will have better reward , and We shall ( also ) say for him in Our Commands what is lenient .
Then ( after consolidating his conquests in the West ) he set forth on ( another ) course .
Until he reached the boundary ( of a locality in the direction ) of the sunrise . There he perceived ( the rising of ) the sun ( as if ) it were rising on the people ( living in that piece of land ) for whom We had provided no cover ( for protection ) against the sun ( i . e . they lived in the caves , without clothes and houses ) .
It occurred the same way . And We have encompassed with Our knowledge whatever he had .
( Having accomplished his conquests in the East , ) he then followed ( still another ) route .
Until he reached ( a place ) between two mountains . He found a people dwelling behind these mountains . They were unable to understand ( anyones ) speech .
They said : O Dhul - Qarnain ! Gog and Magog have spread disorder in the land . Should we fix some money ( as a tribute ) for you on this ( condition ) that you raise a high wall between us and them ?
( Dhul - Qarnain ) said : The power my Lord has given me in this connection is better . Assist me with your vigour ( diligence and labour ) and I shall erect a fortified wall between you and them .
Bring me large blocks of iron . So , when he levelled ( that iron wall ) between the two ( mountain ) tops , he said : ( Now ) blow ( it after putting it on fire ) . So , when he turned that ( iron ) into a fire ( by successive blowing ) he said : ( Now ) bring me molten copper to pour on it .
Then , they ( Gog and Magog ) did not have the ability to scale it , nor could they acquire the capability to bore through it .
( Dhul - Qarnain ) said : This is Mercy from my Lord . But when my Lords promise ( of the Last Hour ) comes ( near ) , He will ( demolish this wall and ) level it with the ground ( i . e . it will be reduced to dust particles ) . And the promise of my Lord is bound to come true .
And at that time We shall release ( all the creation or Gog and Magog ) . They will run into each other ( like surging waves ) . And the trumpet will be blown . Then We shall gather them all ( in the Last Day Assembly ) .
On that Day , We shall present Hell before the disbelievers fully exposed .
Those whose eyes were veiled ( by negligence ) against My remembrance and they could not even listen ( to My remembrance ) .
Do the disbelievers think that , instead of Me , they will take My servants as helpers ? Surely , We have prepared Hell as hospitality for the disbelievers .
Say : Shall We alert you of those who are great losers in respect of deeds ?
It is those whose entire struggle is wasted in worldly life , but they presume they are doing very good works .
It is they who have denied the Signs of their Lord and meeting Him ( after death ) . So all their deeds are ruined , and We shall not give any weight or ( even ) any worth to them on the Day of Rising .
This very Hell is their reward because they kept disbelieving and mocking My Signs and My Messengers .
Surely those who believe and do good deeds persistently shall have the Gardens of Paradise as their hospitality .
They will always live there . They will never seek any change ( of abode ) from there .
Say : If the ocean turns into ink for the Words of my Lord , that ocean will exhaust before the Words of my Lord come to an end , even if We bring another similar ( ocean or ink ) to refill .
Say : I look like you only ( by virtue of my visible creation ) as a man . ( Otherwise just think what congruity you have with me . ) It is I to whom the Revelation is transmitted that your God is the One and only God . ( And just see to it whether you have any such divine potential that the Word of Allah may come down to you . ) So , whoever hopes to meet his Lord should do good deeds and must not associate any partner in the worship of his Lord .
Kaf , Ha , Ya , Ain , Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
This is an account of the Mercy of your Lord ( bestowed ) upon His ( chosen ) servant Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) .
When he called upon his Lord in a low voice ( charged with politeness and submissiveness ) .
He submitted : O my Lord , my bones have grown tender and ( my ) head has turned white like a flame due to old age and , O my Lord , I have never been unblessed when supplicating You .
And I fear my ( disbelieving ) relatives ( may ruin the blessing of Din [ Religion ] ) after my ( soul departs ) and my wife ( too ) is barren . So bless me from Your Presence with an heir ( son ) .
( The one ) who should be my heir ( of divine blessing ) and also the heir of ( the chain of Prophethood from ) the Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) . And , O my Lord , You ( also ) make him an awardee of Your Pleasure .
( Allah said : ) O Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) , indeed We give you the good news of a son whose name shall be Yahya ( John ) . We have not given this name to anyone before him .
( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) submitted : My Lord , how can there be a son to me while my wife is barren , and I have shrivelled ( into extreme debility ) on account of old age ?
( He ) said : ( Dont be amazed . ) It will be the same way . Your Lord said : It is easy for Me ( to create a son ) . Certainly , I created you ( too ) before , while you were ( just ) nothing .
( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) submitted : My Lord , set a Sign for me . He said : Your Sign is that despite good health you shall not be able to speak to the people for three nights ( and days ) .
Then ( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) came out from his worshipping chamber to his people and conveyed to them ( i . e . made them understand ) by gestures to glorify ( Allah ) morning and evening .
O Yahya ( John ) ! Hold fast to ( Our ) Book ( the Torah ) . And We granted him wisdom and vision ( Prophethood ) while yet a child .
And ( blessed him ) with sympathy and tenderness and purity and virtuousness from Our Kind Presence and he was very Godfearing .
( He was ) greatly righteous ( and dutiful ) to his parents and was neither disobedient nor arrogant ( like common boys ) .
And peace be on Yahya ( John ) the day he was born , the day he dies and the day he will be raised up alive .
And , ( O My Esteemed Beloved , ) recite the account of Maryam ( Mary ) in the Book ( the Holy Quran ) when she separated from her family ( adopting seclusion for worship and ) moved to the eastern house .
So she adopted veiling from them ( the family and the people so that the Absolute Divine Beauty unveils Himself ) . Then We sent Our Spirit ( the angel , Jibrail - Gabriel , ) towards her who appeared before her in the complete form of a human being .
( Maryam [ Mary ] ) said : I seek refuge with the Most Gracious ( Lord ) from you if you fear ( Allah ) .
( Jibrail [ Gabriel ] ) said : I am only a messenger from your Lord . ( I have come ) to bestow upon you a pure son .
( Maryam [ Mary ] ) said : How can there be a son to me whereas no man has even touched me , nor am I unchaste ?
( Jibrail [ Gabriel ] ) said : ( Do not wonder . ) It will be the same way . Your Lord says : This ( work ) is easy for Me , and ( the objective is ) that We may make him a Sign for the people and Mercy from Us . And it is a matter ( already ) decreed .
So Maryam ( Mary ) conceived him and positioned herself at a remote site aloof ( from the people ) .
Then the birth pangs drove her to the trunk of a palm - tree . She said ( in anxiety ) : Would that I had died before this and had become totally forgotten !
Then ( Gabriel or Isa [ Jesus ] himself ) called out to her from beneath her : Grieve not . Surely your Lord has made a water spring flow under you ( or has created and laid under you a divinely eminent human being ) .
And shake the trunk of date - palm towards you . It will shed fresh ripe dates upon you .
So eat and drink and cool ( your ) eyes ( with the sight of your beautiful , lovely baby ) . Then if you see any man , say ( to him by gestures ) : I have vowed a fast ( of silence ) to the Most Gracious ( Lord ) , so I shall just not talk to any human being today .
Then , carrying ( the baby in her lap ) , she came to her people . They said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely you have brought quite an amazing thing !
O sister of Harun ( Aaron ) ! Neither was your father a bad man nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
On this Maryam ( Mary ) pointed to ( the baby ) . They said : How can we talk to him who is ( yet ) an infant in the cradle ?
The ( infant himself ) spoke out : I am indeed a servant of Allah . He has given me the Book and has raised me as a Prophet .
And wherever I may reside , He has made me an embodiment of blessing . And He has enjoined upon me Prayer and Zakat ( the Alms - due ) as long as I am alive .
And ( He has made me ) treat my mother with excellent morality and has not made me disobedient and ill - fated .
And peace be upon me on the day of my birth , the day of my demise and the day I shall be raised up alive .
Such is Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary . That is ) the truth about which these people doubt .
It is not Allahs Glory that He should take ( to Himself anyone as ) a son . Holy and Glorified is He ( above this ) . When He decrees any matter , He only says to it : Be , and it becomes .
And surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord ( too ) . So always worship Him alone . This is the straight path .
Then their sects began to differ among themselves . So the disbelievers are doomed due to the presence on the Mighty Day ( of Resurrection ) .
How ( curiously ) will they hear ( with the ears wide open ) and how ( bewilderedly ) will they see ( with the eyes stunned ) on the Day when they will appear before Us ! But today the wrongdoers are but ( sunk ) into the manifest error .
And warn them of the Day of Regret ( and Shame ) when ( every ) matter shall be decided , but they are rapt in ( a state of ) negligence and simply do not believe .
Surely We alone are the inheritor of the earth and ( also ) of those who dwell on it , and ( they all ) shall be brought back to Us .
And recite the account of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) in the Book ( the Holy Quran ) . Surely he was a Prophet blessed with truthfulness .
When he said to his father ( i . e . his uncle Azar who brought him up after his father Tarukh died ) : O my father , why do you worship these ( idols ) which cannot hear or see , nor can they remove any ( troublesome ) thing from you ?
O Father ! No doubt there has come to me knowledge ( from the Divine Presence of Allah ) which has not come to you . Follow me ; I shall show you the straight path .
O Father ! Do not worship Satan . Surely Satan is a great rebel against the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
Father ! Indeed I fear that a torment from Most Kind ( Lord ) may seize you and you become a companion of Satan .
( Azar ) said : Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , have you turned away from my gods ? If you do not practically desist ( from this opposition ) I will certainly stone you to death . And keep away from me for a long while .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : ( All right , ) peace be on you . I shall beg forgiveness for you from my Lord ( even ) now . He is indeed very kind to me . ( He may bestow guidance upon you . )
And I turn away from you ( all ) and these ( idols ) which you worship besides Allah . And I worship my Lord ( with absolute concentration ) . I hope that , owing to worship of my Lord , I shall not be deprived ( of His Bounty ) .
So when Ibrahim ( Abraham , giving up all social links , ) completely separated from the people and those ( idols ) that they worshipped apart from Allah , We blessed him with Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob , son and grandson ) and We made each of them a Prophet .
And We awarded ( all of ) them Our ( special ) Mercy and put their praise and admiration on high rhetoric ( among the believers of every divine religion ) .
And recite the account of Musa ( Moses ) in ( this Holy ) Book . Surely , ( getting rid of the grip of self , ) he had become exalted and was a Messenger and Prophet .
And We called him out from the right of ( Mount ) Tur and blessed him with Our ( special ) nearness for secret converse .
And We granted him out of Our Mercy his brother Harun ( Aaron ) , making him a Prophet ( to assist him in his task ) .
And recite the account of Ismail ( Ishmael ) in ( this ) Book . Surely he was true to ( his ) promise and was a Messenger and Prophet .
And he used to enjoin on his family Prayer and Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and ( held ) the station of Mardiyya in the Presence of his Lord ( i . e . his Lord was well pleased with him ) .
And mention in the Book the account of Idris . Verily he was a Prophet possessing the Truth .
And We raised him to a lofty station .
These are the people on whom Allah bestowed Favour from among the Prophets of the seed of Adam and of those ( believers ) whom We ( saved from Deluge and ) carried with Nuh ( Noah ) in the Ark , and of the posterity of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Israil ( Israel i . e . Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) and of those ( chosen ones ) whom We guided and exalted . When the Verses of the Most Kind ( Lord ) are recited to them , they fall down prostrating themselves in ( profuse ) tears .
Then followed their pathetic successors who gave up Prayers and followed lusts ( of their ill - commanding selves ) . So they will soon face punishment in the Hereafter ( in the Ghayi valley of Hell ) .
Except someone who repents and believes and persists in righteous works ; they will enter Paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
( They will dwell ) in such evergreen gardens which the Most Kind ( Lord ) has promised to His servants in the Unseen . Certainly His promise is about to come true .
They will not hear in it any absurd talk but only greetings of peace ( pouring in from every direction ) . For them , their sustenance will be ( available ) in it morning and evening .
This is the Paradise which We shall award as inheritance to those of Our servants who are God - fearing .
And , ( O Jibrail [ Gabriel ] , say to My Beloved : ) We cannot descend ( onto earth ) without the Command of your Lord . To Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is in between . And your Lord is never forgetful ( of you ) .
( He ) is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two . So worship Him and remain steadfast in His worship . Do you know who is His namesake ?
And man says : Shall I be soon brought forth alive when I die ?
Does man not remember that We had created him before this ( also ) while he was just nothing ?
So , by your Lord , We will certainly gather them and ( all ) Satans together ( on the Day of Judgment ) . We will then bring them ( all ) around Hell fallen down in kneeling position .
Then We shall indeed pick out from every group the one who had been most disobedient to and rebellious against the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And We know best those who are most deserving of being thrown into Hell .
And there is none of you but will pass over Hell . This ( promise ) is absolutely with your Lord which will certainly be fulfilled .
Then We shall deliver the God - fearing and shall leave the wrongdoers in it ( Hell ) down on their knees .
And when Our enlightening Verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say to the believers : ( See in the selfsame world ) which of us two groups has better housing and more influential social circle .
And how many a people have We destroyed before them who were better off ( than these ) in worldly assets and pomp and show .
Say : The Most Kind ( Lord also ) grants respite in age and luxury to the one who is lost in error until , when they see what they have been promised torment or the Day of Rising then they will come to know him who is worse in respect of dwelling and ( also ) weaker in respect of troops .
Allah adds to the guidance of those who are guided aright . And in the sight of your Lord , the lasting pious deeds are better in respect of reward and ( also ) more valuable in terms of end result .
Have you seen such a person that rejected Our Signs and said : I shall certainly be given wealth and children ( the same way even on the Day of Resurrection ) ?
Is he aware of the unseen or has he taken any promise from the Most Kind ( Lord ) ?
No way ! We shall keep writing down what he says , and shall keep increasing for him torment ( upon torment ) .
And ( after his death ) We shall inherit from him what he proclaims , and he will come to Us all alone ( without wealth and children ) .
And they have taken ( many other ) gods apart from Allah so that they may be a source of honour for them .
By no means ! Soon will these ( false gods themselves ) reject their worship and become their enemies .
Have you not seen that We have sent satans upon the disbelievers ? They keep rousing them ( against Islam ) all the time .
So do not make haste against them ( for torment ) . We Ourselves keep counting days ( for their catastrophe ) .
On the Day when We shall assemble the Godfearing lot and take them ( as guests of honour ) to the Presence of the Most Kind ( Lord ) on carriages .
And We shall drive the sinners thirsty towards Hell .
( On that Day ) people will not possess the authority to intercede except those who have taken a promise ( of intercession ) from the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And ( the disbelievers ) say : The Most Kind ( Lord ) has taken ( to Himself ) a son .
( O disbelievers ! ) You have indeed brought most horrible and unusual evil ( on your tongues ) .
The heavens may just burst at this ( fabricated lie ) and the earth split asunder and the mountains fall down to pieces .
That they have attributed a son to the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And it is not the Glory of the Most Kind ( Lord ) to take ( someone as ) a son .
Whoever are ( dwelling ) in the heavens and the earth ( whether angels , jinn or human beings ) appear just as servants before the Most Kind Allah .
( Allah ) has surely encompassed them with His ( knowledge ) and has counted them thoroughly ( i . e . numbering them one by one ) .
And each one of them has to appear before His Presence alone on the Day of Resurrection .
Surely those who believed and did pious deeds , the Most Kind ( Lord ) will create love for them in the hearts ( of the people ) .
So We have indeed made this ( Quran ) easy in your own tongue so that , by means of it , you may communicate good news to the God - fearing and may warn thereby the contentious people .
And how many a community have We destroyed before them ! Do you perceive even a trace or hear even the faintest fizzle of anyone of them ?
Ta - Ha . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) We have not revealed the Quran to you that you land in distress .
But ( it ) is ( revealed as ) admonition for him who fears ( his Lord ) .
( This ) has been revealed by ( Allah ) Who created the earth and lofty heavens .
( He is ) Most Kind Who settled on the Throne ( of Power and Supreme Authority over all the systems of the universe befitting His Glory ) .
( So ) whatever is in the heavens ( i . e . the upper divine and celestial spheres and spatial terrestrial spheres ) and whatever is in the earth and whatever is in between the two ( i . e . the atmospheric spheres ) and whatever is beneath the soil to its bed , all are ( functioning in compliance with ) His ( command and control system ) .
And ( there is no harm ) if , in remembrance and Prayer , you raise ( louden your voice ) . He knows even the secrets ( of hearts ) and also the most hidden mysteries . ( Then how He will not hear the loud supplications ! )
Allah is ( His Self - Name ) besides Whom there is no God ( i . e . believe in Him alone and deny all other false gods ) . There are ( also ) many other Beautiful Names for Him ( that speak of His most beautiful and fascinating attributes ) .
And has the account of Musa ( Moses ) reached you ?
When Musa ( Moses ) saw a fire ( on his way back to Egypt from Madyan ) , he said to his family : Stay here . I have seen a fire ( or I have perceived a flash of love and cordiality in a fire ) . Perhaps I may bring a brand from it for you ( also ) or I find at that fire the guidance ( which I am searching for ) .
So when he reached that ( fire ) , a call was made : O Musa ( Moses ) !
Certainly I am your Lord , so take off your shoes . Verily you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa .
And I have chosen you ( for my Messengership ) , so listen to what is being revealed to you with absolute attentiveness .
Verily I am Allah . There is no God other than Me . So always worship Me and establish Prayer for the sake of My remembrance .
Certainly the Last Hour is about to come . I want to keep it secret so that every soul may be rewarded for that ( deed ) for which it is exerting .
So let not someone who ( himself ) does not believe in it and follows his own lust ( of the lower self ) prevent you from ( focusing ) it , otherwise you ( too ) will perish .
And what is this in your right hand , O Musa ( Moses ) ?
He submitted : This is my stick . I lean on it and beat down leaves with it for my goats , and in it there are also many other benefits for me .
Allah said : O Musa ( Moses ) , cast it down ( on the ground ) .
So he cast it down ( on the ground ) and suddenly it became a serpent slithering ( here and there ) .
Allah said : Catch it and do not fear . We shall transform it to its former state just now .
And ( it was commanded : ) Press your hand in your armpit . It will come out radiant white without any disease . ( This ) is another Sign .
( We are doing ) this so that We may show you greater Signs of Our ( Might ) .
Go to Pharaoh . He has exceeded limits ( in defiance and rebellion ) .
Musa ( Moses ) prayed : O my Lord , expand my breast for me .
And make my task ( as a Messenger ) easy for me .
And untie the knot from my tongue .
That people may understand ( easily ) what I say .
And appoint for me a minister from my family .
( That ) is Harun ( Aaron ) , my brother .
Provide me strength and backup with him .
And make him share my task ( of Messengership ) .
So that we ( both ) may amply glorify You .
And amply remember You .
Surely You see us well ( in the perspective of total scenario ) .
( Allah ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , you are granted your every prayer .
And surely We graciously favoured you once ( earlier as well ) .
When We revealed to your mothers heart what was revealed
That put him ( Musa [ Moses ] ) into a box and place that ( box ) in the river . Then the river will drift it to the bank . My enemy and his enemy will pick him up . And I cast on you from My Presence a reflection of My ( Exceptional ) love ( i . e . We have made you so lovely and charismatic that whoever glance at you will be fascinated ) . And ( this was done ) so that you might be brought up before My eyes .
And when your sister , ( posing as a stranger , ) walking along , said ( to Pharaohs family ) : Shall I point out to you ( a woman ) who will nurse this ( infant ) ? Then We brought you back to your mother ( on the pretext of nursing ) so that she might cool her eyes and might not feel aggrieved as well . And you killed a man ( a disbeliever of Pharaohs people ) . Then We delivered you from ( that ) agony ( too ) and tested and assessed you through many trials . Then you stayed among the people of Madyan for many years . Musa ( Moses ) ! Then you came ( here ) at the time fixed ( by Allah . He was then exactly forty years old ) .
And ( now ) I have chosen you for Myself ( for the task of Messengership and the Exceptional Favour ) .
Go you and your brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) with My Signs and do not slacken in remembering Me .
Go both of you to Pharaoh ; surely he has transgressed all bounds in rebellion .
So talk to him politely . He may perhaps accept admonition or fear ( My wrath ) .
Both of them submitted : O our Lord , we fear lest he should commit some excess against us or become ( more ) rebellious .
( Allah ) said : Do not fear . I am indeed with you both . I hear and see ( all ) .
So , go you both to him and say : We are ( the Messengers ) sent by your Lord . So ( set free ) the Children of Israel ( from your slavery and ) send them with us . And do not persecute them ( anymore ) . Surely we have brought you a Sign from your Lord . And peace be upon him who follows Guidance !
Verily , it has been revealed to us that the torment will come upon ( every ) such person that rejects ( the Messenger ) and turns away from him .
( Pharaoh ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , Who is the Lord of you both ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : Our Lord is He Who brought everything into being ( as most suitable it was ) , then guided it ( according to its potential ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : So , what was the fate of former people ( who did not believe in your Lord ) ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : The knowledge about them is recorded ( and saved ) in a Book with My Lord . My Lord does not go wrong , nor does He forget .
He is the One Who made the earth habitable for you and provided therein paths for you ( to travel ) and sent down water from the sky . Then by means of that ( water ) We bring forth ( from the earth ) pairs of various kinds of vegetation .
Eat and pasture your cattle . Surely , there are Signs in it for the wise .
We created you from this ( very soil of the earth ) and We shall return you into the same and shall bring you forth from the very same once more .
And surely We showed him ( Pharaoh ) all Our Signs ( bestowed upon Musa [ Moses ] and Harun [ Aaron ] ) but he belied and refused to believe .
He said : Musa ( Moses ) , have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic ?
So we shall also bring to you magic resembling it . Therefore , settle an appointment between us and yourself ( for the contest ) which neither we nor you shall violate . ( The place of contest ) is to be an open and smooth ground .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : The day of your promise is the Eid ( Id ) Day ( the day of Annual Festival ) and that ( on that day ) all the people are to assemble there early in the forenoon .
Then Pharaoh went back ( from the meeting ) , put together his ( schemes of ) pretension and deception and then came back ( at the appointed time ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said ( to the sorcerers ) : Woe to you ! ( Beware ! ) Do not invent a lie against Allah lest He should eliminate you by torment . And surely he who fabricates a lie ( against Allah ) is a failure .
Thereupon they ( the sorcerers ) disputed among themselves about their affair and started inaudible whispering .
They said : These two are really magicians who have the intention to drive you out of your land with sorcery and put an end to your exemplary culture and religion .
( They mutually decided . ) So collect all your tricks ( of magic ) and come into the arena ( together ) in a queue and the one who prevails today will be victorious .
( The magicians ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , either you cast ( your thing ) or we become the first ones to cast .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Rather you cast down . Then the sight was that suddenly their cords and rods , by the effect of their magic , seemed to Musa ( Moses ) as if they were slithering ( on the ground ) .
Now Musa ( Moses ) felt a sort of hidden fear in his heart .
We said ( to Musa [ Moses ] ) : Do not fear . Verily , you will have the upper hand .
And cast down ( this staff ) that is in your right hand ( on the ground ) . It will swallow up that ( craft ) which they have contrived ( artificially ) . Whatever they have wrought is but a deceitful trick of a sorcerer , and wherever a magician may come , he will not be successful .
( Then things happened the same way . ) So all the sorcerers fell down in prostration ( and ) said : We embrace faith in the Lord of Harun ( Aaron ) and Musa ( Moses ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : You have embraced faith in Him before I grant you permission . Surely he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) is also your chief ( trainer ) who has taught you magic . So , ( now ) I shall certainly cut off your hands and your feet on the opposite sides and shall certainly crucify you on the palm trunks . Then you shall come to know for sure which of us is sterner in inflicting torture and lasts for a longer term .
( The magicians ) said : We shall not at all prefer you to the Clear Signs that have come to us . By that ( Lord ) Who has created us , decide whatever you want to do , for you can decide merely about ( this few days ) worldly life .
We have indeed believed in our Lord in order that He may forgive us our sins and also ( may forgive ) that sorcery to which you forced us , and Allah is the Best and Ever - Abiding .
Surely whoever comes to his Lord as an evildoer , certainly for him is Hell . ( And it is such a torment ) wherein he will neither die nor survive .
And whoever comes to His Presence as a believer ( and ) has ( also ) done good deeds , it is they for whom are high ranks .
( Those ) are evergreen gardens beneath which streams flow . ( They ) will dwell therein forever . And that is the reward for the one who purifies himself ( of the impurity and indecency of disbelief and immorality ) .
And certainly We sent revelation to Musa ( Moses ) : Move out at night taking My servants with you . So , make a dry path in the river ( by striking your staff ) . Have no fear to be overtaken ( by Pharaoh ) , nor be afraid ( of drowning ) .
Then Pharaoh chased them with his troops . So , the ( waves of the ) river swept over them as much as they covered them up .
And Pharaoh led his people astray and did not guide them to the right path .
O Children of Israel ! ( Realize ! ) Certainly We delivered you from your enemy and gave you the promise of ( coming to ) the right of ( Mount ) Tur and ( there ) We sent down to you the manna and the quails .
( And He said to you : ) Eat of the pure things that We have provided for you and do not exceed limits in that , or My wrath will become inevitable for you . And he on whom My wrath comes due is in truth destroyed .
And I am surely Most Forgiving to him who repents and affirms faith and behaves piously , then sticks to guidance ( firmly ) .
And , O Musa ( Moses ) , why did you hasten ( in coming to Tur ahead of ) your people ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) submitted : They too are coming behind me , and I have hastened to appear before Your Presence ( possessed by love and ecstasy ) in order that You may be pleased , O my Lord !
( Allah ) said : We have indeed put your people in trial after you ( came away ) and Samiri has led them astray .
So , Musa ( Moses ) returned to his people angered and grieved ( and ) said : O my people , did your Lord not give you a fair promise ? Had a long time lapsed on you in ( the fulfilment of ) the promise ? ( Or ) did you wish that the wrath of your Lord should come due ( and befall ) you ? So you have violated ( your ) promise to me .
They said : We have not violated our promise to you of our own will , but ( what happened is that ) we were loaded with the heavy burden of the ornaments of the people , so we cast them ( into the fire ) ; then similarly Samiri ( too ) cast them away .
Then he ( Samiri ) moulded ( out of the molten ornaments ) a statue of a calf for them which produced sound like that of a cow . Then they said : This is your Lord and the Lord of Musa ( Moses too ) . So he ( Samiri ) forgot ( at this point ) .
Well , did they not see ( even this much ) that this ( calf ) could not answer them a word , nor had it any power to cause them any loss or profit ?
Earlier , Harun ( Aaron also ) had said to them , ( warning ) : O people , you have undergone a trial by virtue of this ( calf ) while your Lord is ( not this , ) but surely ( He , ) the Most Kind One . So follow me and obey my command .
They said : We shall hold fast to its ( worship ) until Musa ( Moses ) comes back to us .
Musa ( Moses ) said : Harun ( Aaron ) , when you saw them erring , what stopped you .
From following me ( and communicating to me ) ? Or who prohibited you from following my way , ( in forbidding them fiercely ) . Did you disobey me ?
( Harun [ Aaron ] ) said : O son of my mother , seize me not by my beard or my head . ( In being harsh ) I feared you would say : You have created division among the Children of Israel and have not safeguarded my word .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Samiri , ( tell me , ) what is the matter with you ?
He said : I saw what these people had not seen . I took a handful ( of dust ) from the footstep of the angel ( that visited you ) ; then I cast it ( into the model of the calf ) and this way my ( lower ) self made ( it ) attractive to me .
Musa ( Moses ) said : So ( get out from here and ) go away . There is for you a lifelong ( punishment ) that you will keep saying ( to everyone ) : Touch ( me ) not , ( touch me not ) . And there is yet another promise ( of punishment ) for you which will not be averted at all . And look at this ( self - made ) god of yours to which you held fast ( in worship ) . We will surely burn it and scatter ( its dust ) well over the river .
( O my people ! He ) Allah alone is your God apart from Whom there is no god . He has encompassed everything in ( His ) knowledge .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Thus We communicate to you news about the ( communities ) who have passed away , and We have surely given you from Our Exclusive Presence the Reminder ( i . e . an Admonishing Book ) .
Whoever turns away from it will certainly carry an unmanageable burden on the Day of Rising .
They will ( remain ) in this ( torment ) forever , and it will be a very evil burden for them on the Day of Rising .
The Day when the trumpet will be blown , We shall assemble the evildoers with their bodies and eyes turned blue ( due to intense fear and loss of sight ) .
Inaudibly whispering to one another : You stayed in the world for hardly ten days .
We know best what they will be saying while one of them better in wisdom and deeds will say : You have not stayed ( in the world ) for more than a day .
And they ask you concerning mountains . So say : My Lord will blow them off as dust particles .
Then will change it into a levelled , barren land .
In which you will find neither any depression nor any elevation .
On that Day people will tread on behind the caller and there will be no deviation in ( following ) him . And all voices will be hushed due to the Majesty of the Most Kind ( Lord ) . So you will not hear anything except a faint sound of a stir .
On that Day no intercession shall be fruitful except his ( intercession ) whom the Most Kind ( Lord ) has granted leave ( and permission ) and with whose word He is pleased ( such as Prophets and Messengers , Allahs chosen and fearing servants , Godwary slaves , innocent children and many other devoted servants of Allah whose intercession is validated ) .
He knows all those ( things ) which are ahead of them and which are behind them , and they cannot encompass His ( knowledge ) with ( their ) knowledge .
And ( all ) faces will bow down before the Holy Presence of the Ever - Living ( and ) Self - Subsisting ( Lord ) , and surely he who bears the burden of wrongdoing will crumble to failure .
And whoever does righteous deeds and is also blessed with faith will fear neither any injustice nor any harm .
And in this way have We sent down ( this last Revealed Book ) in the Arabic tongue ( in shape of ) the Quran and have explained in it more often than not matters inspiring fear ( of torment , in diverse ways , ) so that they may become Godfearing or this ( Quran ) may inculcate in their ( hearts a passion for the acceptance of admonition or ) the remembrance ( of the Last Day ) .
So Most High and Exalted is Allah . He alone is the True Sovereign . And do not hasten in ( reciting ) the Quran before its revelation is fully accomplished to you . And always submit ( before the Holy Presence of your Lord ) : O my Lord , increase me further in knowledge .
And truly , ( far ) earlier than this , We had given a strict command to Adam but he forgot . And We did not observe in him any intention ( to disobey ) at all ( it was just an omission ) .
And ( recall the time ) when We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam , they fell down in prostration except Iblis . He refused .
Then We said : O Adam , verily this ( Satan ) is an enemy to you and your wife . So let him not get you both ousted from Paradise ; then you shall be put to toil .
Surely there is this ( comfort ) for you ( in Paradise ) that you will neither feel hungry nor go naked .
And that you will neither feel thirsty here , nor will the sun prick ( you ) .
But Satan suggested to them ( an ) idea . He said : O Adam ! Shall I inform you of the tree of spending eternal life ( in the Paradise of Allahs nearness ) and also the ( secret of that divine ) dominion which will neither fall nor cease to exist ?
So ( in fondness of that station of eternal nearness to Allah ) both ate the fruit of that tree . So , their private parts became exposed to them , and both began to stick to their ( bodies ) the leaves of ( the trees in ) Paradise . And Adam made a mistake ( by way of omission ) in ( understanding ) his Lords Command . So he could not achieve the aim ( of eternal life in Paradise ) .
Then his Lord chose him ( for His nearness and Prophethood ) and turned to him ( in His Exceptional Forgiveness and Mercy ) and showed the path to the coveted destination .
( Allah ) said : Go down from here all of you . Some of you will be enemies to some others . Then if there comes to you any Guidance ( Revelation ) from Me , whoever will follow My Guidance will neither lose the straight path ( in the world ) nor face misfortune ( in the Hereafter ) .
And whoever turns away from My Direction and Guidance ( remembrance and advice ) , his worldly sustenance will be narrowed and We will raise him blind on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) .
He will say : O my Lord , why have You raised me up blind ( today ) whereas I had vision ( in the world ) ?
( Allah ) will say : In like manner Our Signs came to you ( in the world ) but you forgot them and the same way you ( too ) will be forgotten today .
And that is how We recompense the one who exceeds the limit ( in sins ) and does not believe in the Revelations of his Lord , and surely the torment of the Last Day is extremely severe and everlasting .
Has ( this fact ) not guided them as to how many people We destroyed before them in whose dwelling places they ( now ) walk about ? Undoubtedly , in this are ( many ) Signs for the wise .
And had it not been settled already by your Lord and the time ( of the Day of Resurrection ) not fixed ( for their torment , befalling them ) the calamity ( right now ) would have been inevitable ?
So bear their ( heart - rending ) talk patiently and glorify your Lord with His praise before the rising of the sun ( in Fajr [ dawn ] Prayer ) and before its setting ( in the Asr [ afternoon ] Prayer ) and glorify Him in the early hours of night ( the Maghrib [ sunset ] and Isha [ evening ] Prayer ) and also at the ends of the day ( in Zuhr [ midday ] Prayer when the first half of the day ends and the second half starts . O Esteemed Beloved , all this is designed ) so that you may be pleased .
And do not glance with amazement and wonder at the adornments ( of worldly life ) which We have provided to some classes ( of the disbelieving materialists ) for their ( short - term ) luxury so that We may cause for them a trial in these ( very things ) . And the provision of your Lord ( in the Hereafter ) is the best and eternal .
And enjoin Prayer on your family and strictly adhere to it . And We do not ask for provision from you , ( rather ) We provide for you . And it is fearing God that brings about best results .
And ( the disbelievers ) say : Why this ( Prophet ) does not bring us any Sign from his Lord ? Has there not come to them ( the Quran , ) a Clear Proof of the things ( mentioned ) in the former Books ?
And had We destroyed them through some calamity already , they would have said : O Lord , why did You not send to us any Messenger so that we might have followed Your Revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
Say : Everyone is waiting , so wait on . You will soon come to know who are the people of the right path and who are the guided ones .
The time of reckoning of people has drawn near but , rapt in heedlessness , they are disinclined ( to obedience ) .
Whenever some fresh admonition comes to them from their Lord , they listen to it ( with such carelessness ) as if they are engaged in sport .
Their hearts have become neglectful and ( these ) wrongdoers whisper ( against you ) inaudibly : He is but a human being like you . Do you ( even then ) submit to ( his ) magic while you can see ?
( The Esteemed Prophet ) said : My Lord knows ( every ) word uttered in the heavens and the earth and He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
But ( the wrongdoers go so far as to ) say : This ( Quran ) comprises ( things seen in ) confused dreams . Nay ! He has invented it ( himself ) . Nay , he is ( in fact ) a poet . ( If he is a true Prophet , ) let him ( also ) bring us some Sign as were former ( Prophets ) sent ( with Signs ) .
Every community whom We destroyed before them disbelieved ( these signs ) . So , will these people believe ?
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) We sent only men ( as Prophets ) before you ( also ) . We used to send them Revelations . So , ( O people , ) if you do not know ( yourselves ) , ask the people of remembrance .
And We did not create them ( the Prophets ) with such bodies as would not eat food , nor were they to live ( their visible life in the world ) forever .
Then We fulfilled Our promise to them . So We delivered them and those whom We liked and We destroyed the transgressors .
Verily , We have revealed to you the Book which contains ( means and substance for ) your admonition . So do you not have sense ?
And how many communities which were unjust did We destroy and We raised up other communities after them !
Then , when they sensed Our punishment ( approaching ) , they started fleeing fast from there .
( It was said to them : ) Do not flee in haste and return to the same place where you were given comforts , and ( go back ) to your ( luxurious ) dwellings . It is likely that you are interrogated .
They said : Woe to us ! Surely , we were wrongdoers .
So this is what they always bewailed till We made them like a reaped field ( and a heap ) of extinguished fire .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them ( useless ) as a sport .
If We intended to take up some sport , We would adopt it on Our own if at all We were to do ( so ) .
Nay , We strike at falsehood with the Truth with full force . So , the Truth crushes it and it ( i . e . falsehood ) gets destroyed . And you are bound to ruin yourselves owing to what you utter .
And whatever is in the heavens and in the earth ( serves and ) belongs to Him alone . And those ( angels ) who ( remain ) in His Presence are not arrogant towards His worship , nor do they become weary ( of carrying out His obedience ) .
They glorify ( Him ) night and day ceaselessly , and do not observe even a momentary pause .
Have they ( the disbelievers ) taken from ( the contents of ) the earth gods that can raise ( the dead ) alive ?
Had there been in these two ( i . e . the heaven and the earth ) other gods ( as well ) apart from Allah , then both would have been destroyed . So , Holy is Allah , the Lord of the Throne , Transcendent of all ( the things ) that these ( polytheists ) utter .
He cannot be questioned for what He does and they will be questioned ( for every action ) .
Have they ( the disbelievers ) taken gods other than Him ? Say : Bring your proof . This ( Quran ) is the reminder of those who are with me and ( also ) the reminder of those who had been before me . But most of them do not know the Truth , so they have adopted aversion to it .
And We did not send any Messenger before you but We frequented the same revelation to him : There is no God but I , so worship Me ( alone ) .
And they say : The Most Kind ( Lord ) has taken ( angels as His ) children . Holy is He . Nay , ( the angels whom they consider His children ) are but ( Allahs ) esteemed servants .
They do not precede Him in ( uttering ) any word and they remain engaged in carrying out only His Command .
He ( Allah ) knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede ( before His Presence ) but for him with whom He is pleased . And they remain fearful of His Awe and Magnificence .
And who is it among them to say : I am a god besides ( Allah ) ? So , him We shall award Hell as punishment . This is the way We punish the wrongdoers .
And have the disbelievers not seen that the whole heavenly universe and the earth were ( all ) joined together as one unit and then We split them apart ? And We originated ( the life of ) living organism ( on earth ) from water . So do they not accept faith ( even after learning these facts brought forth by the Quran ) ?
And We set up firm mountains in the earth lest it should shake with them while rotating ( in its orbit ) . And We made in this ( earth ) broad highways so that people might find routes ( to reach different destinations ) .
And We made the heavens ( i . e . upper spheres of the earth ) a secure roof ( in order to save the inhabitants of the earth from adverse effects of fatal forces and aggressive waves shooting towards the earth from space ) and they turn away from these Signs ( of upper spheres ) .
And ( Allah ) is He Who created the night and the day , and ( also ) the sun and the moon . All ( heavenly bodies ) are continually floating fast in their respective orbits .
And We have not granted eternity to any human being before you ( in the physical life of the world ) . So , if you pass away ( from here ) will they live forever ?
Every soul has to taste death , and We make you undergo foul and fair for trial , and towards Us will you be returned .
And when the disbelievers see you , they just start mocking you ( and say : ) Is this the one who talks about your gods ( with rejection and denial ) ? And yet it is they themselves who reject the mention of the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
Man has been created ( instinctually ) from haste . I shall soon show you My Signs , so do not seek hurry .
And they say : When will this promise ( of torment ) be ( fulfilled ) if you are truthful ?
If the disbelievers knew the time when they will not be able to keep off the Fire ( of Hell ) from their faces and their backs and nor will they be helped , ( then they would not call out to hasten the torment ) .
In fact , it ( i . e . the Last Day ) will come upon them all of a sudden and stun them . So neither will they have the power to avert it , nor will they be granted respite .
And of course the Messengers were mocked before you too . Then those who ridiculed were beset by the same ( torment ) which they used to make fun of .
Say : Who can guard and save you from ( the punishment of ) the Most Kind ( Lord ) by night and by day ? In fact they keep away from the remembrance of the ( same ) Lord .
Have they any gods apart from Us who can save them ( from the torment ) ? They do not have any power even to help themselves . Nor will they get any support and alliance from Us .
Nay , We provided for them and their fathers ( generous luxuries ) so much so that their life spans also gradually prolonged . So do they not perceive that ( through Islamic conquests ) We are gradually reducing the land ( under their control ) from all borders ? So , will they dominate ( now ) ?
Say : I warn you only through Revelation . But the deaf do not hear the call whenever they are warned .
If ( even ) a minor calamity from your Lord is to really touch them , they will surely say : Woe to us . Certainly we were the unjust .
And on the Day of Resurrection We shall set up balances of fairness and justice . So no soul will be wronged in the least . And if there is ( someones deed ) equal to the weight of a mustard seed , We shall bring forth that ( as well ) . And We are Sufficient to take account .
And indeed We granted Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( [ Aaron ] the Book , the Torah , ) the criterion distinguishing ( between right and wrong ) and ( the embodiment of ) light and admonition for the Godfearing .
( They are ) those who fear their Lord unseen and who dread ( the calamities of ) the Hour ( of Rising ) .
This ( Quran ) is the Most Blessed Admonition which We have revealed . Do you deny it ?
And surely We had awarded Ibrahim ( Abraham ) understanding and guidance ( commensurate with his rank ) well before , and We knew full well his ( competence and capability ) .
When he said to his father ( i . e . uncle ) and his people : What idols are these ( whose worship ) you are stuck to , squatting ?
They said : We found our fathers worshipping them .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Surely you and your fathers ( all ) were in manifest error .
They said : Have you ( alone ) brought the truth , or are you ( just ) one of the entertainers ?
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : The truth is that your Lord Who created them ( all ) is the Lord of the heavens and the earth , and I am of those who bear witness to this ( truth ) .
And I swear by Allah , I shall certainly implement a plan against your idols after you turn back and go away .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) broke those ( idols ) into pieces except the biggest ( idol ) so that they might turn to it .
They said : Who has done this to our gods ? Surely he is of the wrongdoers .
( Some of the ) people said : We have heard of a young man who speaks of them ( with denial and disgust ) . He is known as Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
They said : Bring him before the people so that they may see ( him ) .
( When Ibrahim [ Abraham ] came ) they said : O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , is it you who have done this to our gods ?
He said : Nay , this biggest ( idol ) of them would have done this . So ask these very ( idols ) if they can speak .
Then they turned to their own ( reflections ) and said : Surely you yourselves have become the wrongdoers ( by worshipping these helpless idols incapable of doing anything ) .
Then they were turned upside down upon their heads ( i . e . their thinking reverted and they said : Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) , surely you yourself know that they do not speak .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Then do you worship apart from Allah these ( idols ) which can neither bring you any benefit nor do you any harm ?
Fie on you and ( also ) on these ( idols ) that you worship apart from Allah . Do you not then have sense ?
They said : Burn him and help your ( ruined ) gods if you have to do ( something ) .
We said : Fire , be cool and become absolute safety for Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
And they had intended an evil plot against Ibrahim ( Abraham ) but We failed them badly .
And ( from Iraq ) We rescued Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Lut ( Lot , his nephew , the son of his brother Haran , ) towards ( Syria ) , the land in which We have placed blessings for the people of the world .
And We blessed him with ( a son ) Ishaq ( Isaac ) and ( by his prayer a grandson ) Yaqub ( Jacob ) in addition , and We made all of them pious .
And We made them the leaders ( of mankind ) who guided ( people ) by Our Command and We sent to them Revelation ( giving commands ) to do good deeds , establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) . And All of them were Our devoted worshippers .
And We ( also ) bestowed upon Lut ( Lot ) wisdom and knowledge and We delivered him from the town whose people practised filthy deeds . They were indeed a people with extremely evil ( and ) immoral character .
And We admitted Lut ( Lot ) to the fold of Our Mercy . Truly he was of the pious .
( And recall ) Nuh ( Noah as well ) when he called ( on Us ) before these ( Prophets ) . So We granted his prayer . Then We delivered him and his family from great distress and grief .
And We helped him against ( most torturous circumstances of ) the people who rejected Our Revelations . Surely they ( too ) were a very evil people , so We drowned them all .
And ( also call to mind the account of ) Dawud ( David ) and Sulaiman ( Solomon ) when both of them were to decide ( the dispute ) of a crop when the goats of a tribe unattended by the shepherd entered the field at night ( and destroyed it ) . And We were witnessing their judgment .
So We alone taught Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] the way to make that judgment ) and blessed them all with reason and knowledge . And We made ( even ) the mountains and the birds subservient to ( the command of ) Dawud ( David ) . They all celebrated ( Our ) Praise ( with him jointly ) . And it was We Who were doing ( all this ) .
And We taught Dawud ( David ) the art of making the coats of mail for you to protect you from injury in your battle . Are you then grateful ?
And to Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] We subjected ) the violent wind which used to blow by his command ( from all sides and directions ) towards ( Syria ) , the land in which We have placed Blessings . And We know everything ( full ) well .
And ( We ) also made ( subservient to Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) some of Satans ( devils and jinn ) who dived for him ( in the seas ) and besides that accomplished other services also ( under his command ) . And We alone kept watch over them ( devils ) .
And ( call to mind the account of ) Ayyub ( Job ) when he called out to his Lord : Misery has laid a hand on me , and You are the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
So We granted his prayer and We removed the misery that was afflicting him . And We ( also ) gave him back his family and ( bestowed upon him ) the like of them along with them . This is an Exceptional Mercy from Us and an Advice for those who are devoted to Our worship ( that is how Allah rewards patience and gratitude ) .
And ( also recall ) Ismail ( Ishmael ) , and Idris and Dhul - Kifl . They were all steadfast men of patience .
And We admitted them to ( the Embrace of ) Our Mercy . Surely they were of the pious .
And ( also remember ) Dhun - Nun ( the Prophet whom fish swallowed ) when he went away enraged ( at his people ) . So he thought that We would not cause him any distress ( during that journey ) . Then he cried out ( entangled ) in ( the layers of ) the darkness ( of night , under the river and in the fish belly ) : There is no God except You . Glory be to You . Surely I was of those who wrong ( their souls ) .
So We granted his prayer and We delivered him from grief . And likewise We always deliver the believers .
And ( remember ) Zakariyya ( [ Zacharias ] as well ) when he called out to his Lord : O my Lord , leave me not single and You are the Best of all inheritors .
So We granted his prayer and We blessed him with Yahya ( John ) and for his sake made his wife healthy ( fertile ) . Surely they ( all ) used to hasten in ( doing ) pious deeds and used to call on Us ( feeling ) eager , fond , fearful and frightened , and used to humble before Our Presence in tearful submissions .
( And call to mind ) that ( embodiment of purity ) Maryam ( [ Mary ] as well ) who guarded her chastity . Then We breathed into her of Our Spirit and We made her and her son ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) a Sign ( of Our Power ) for the people of the world .
Surely these ( people ) are your Umma ( [ Community ] and all ) are one Umma . And I am your Lord , so worship Me ( alone ) .
And these ( people of the Book ) split up their Din [ Religion ] into pieces among themselves . To Us they all will return .
So whoever does good deeds and is a believer as well ( the reward of ) his effort will not be refused , and surely We are writing down ( all ) his deeds .
And it is not possible that the people of the town whom We destroyed will not return to Us ( after death ) .
Until when Gog and Magog are let loose and they will come down running from every high place .
And the true promise ( of the Day of Resurrection ) will draw near , then the eyes of the disbelievers will suddenly fix staring ( and they will cry out : ) Woe to us ! We were indeed oblivious of ( the arrival of ) this ( Day ) ; in fact we were unjust .
Surely you and the ( idols ) you worship besides Allah ( all ) are the fuel of Hell . You are going to enter it .
Had they been ( true ) gods , they would not have entered Hell . And all of them will stay in it forever .
There will be their ( sighing and wailing , a ) roar of screaming in it and they will not be able to hear in it anything ( else ) .
Surely those for whom good has already been decreed from Us will be kept away from ( Hell ) .
They shall not hear even its slightest hissing sound and they shall live forever in those ( bounties ) which their hearts will long for .
( Even ) the Greatest Horror ( of the Day of Rising ) will not grieve them and the angels will welcome them , ( saying : ) This is ( but ) your Day which you were promised .
On that Day , We shall roll up the ( whole ) heavenly universe as the written papers are rolled up . The way We created ( the universe ) the first time , We shall repeat the same process of creation ( after its extinction ) . We have made it binding upon Us to fulfil this promise . We will do ( repeat it ) .
And surely We wrote in the az - Zabur ( the Psalms ) after ( stating the ) admonition that the inheritors of the earth ( in the Hereafter ) will be My pious servants .
Surely there is for the devoted worshippers a guarantee and sufficient provision in this ( Quran , of achieving the objective ) .
And , ( O Esteemed Messenger , ) We have not sent you but as a Mercy for all the worlds .
Say : This is what is revealed to me that your God is One God ( only ) . Do you then accept Islam ?
Then , if they turn away , say : I have conveyed to you all alike , and I do not know ( on my own ) whether that ( torment ) which you are promised is near or far .
He surely knows what you utter loudly and also knows ( all ) that you keep secret .
And I do not know ( on my own ) that this ( delaying of the torment and the respite given to you ) may perhaps be a trial for you and the intention may be to provide ( you ) a benefit till a fixed time .
( Our Beloved ) submitted : My Lord , judge ( between us ) with truth and Our Lord is Ever - Merciful and He is the One Whose help is sought against the ( heart - rending ) words which , ( O disbelievers , ) you utter .
O mankind ! Keep fearing your Lord . No doubt the earthquake of the Hour of Rising is a terrible thing .
The Day when you see it , every suckling woman ( i . e . mother ) will forget the ( infant ) she was suckling and every pregnant woman will abort her fetus . And , ( O observer , ) you will see people in a drunken ( state ) whereas actually they will not be drunk , but the torment of Allah will be ( so ) severe ( that everyone will lose his senses ) .
And there are some people who dispute about Allah without any knowledge and understanding and follow every disobedient Satan .
( Satan ) for whom it is written that whoever takes him for a friend , he will lead him astray and show him the road to the torment of Hell .
O people ! If you are in doubt about being raised up ( after death ) then ( contemplate your creation and evolution ) .
We initiated your creation ( i . e . chemical genesis ) from ( the extract of ) clay , then ( your biological genesis ) from a sperm drop ( zygote ) , then from a hanging mass ( clinging to the uterus like a leech embryo ) and then from a lump of flesh looking chewed , having manifest contours of elementary formation of some parts of the body and others yet to form ( fetus ) , so that We might show you ( Our Power and the trueness of Our Revelations ) .
So We cause whom We please to stay in the wombs till an appointed time . Then We bring you forth as an infant ,
then ( nourish you ) so that you may reach your youth . And of you are ( also ) some who die ( early ) and some are brought to quite a worthless age so that ( he may see this state too that ) having learnt so much knowledge , now he knows ( just ) nothing ( once more ) .
And you see the earth completely dry ( i . e . dead ) and when We shower water on it , a stir of freshness and fertility runs through it .
And it swells enriched and puts forth in pairs every kind of blooming and beauteous vegetation .
( All ) this ( keeps happening ) because Allah alone is the True ( Creator and All - Sustaining ) and doubtlessly He alone gives life to the dead and certainly He alone is All - Powerful to do everything .
And , certainly , the Last Hour is bound to come . There is no doubt about it . And verily Allah shall raise up alive those who are in the graves .
And there are some of the people who dispute about Allah ( His Essence , Attributes and Powers ) without knowledge and understanding , and without any guidance and logic , and without any enlightening Book ( sent down from heaven ) .
Turning his neck ( in arrogance ) so that he may lead ( others also ) astray from the path of Allah . For him is disgrace in the world ( too ) and on the Day of Resurrection We shall make him taste the burning torment .
This is because of the doings which your hands sent forth , and indeed Allah is not in the least unjust to His servants .
And among people there is also one who worships Allah ( keeping just ) on the verge ( of Din [ Religion ] ) . So if some ( worldly ) benefit reaches him , he feels contented with this ( Din [ Religion ] ) and if some trial befalls him , he turns about on his face away ( from Din [ Religion ] ) . He met a loss in this world ( as well as ) in the Hereafter . It is this that is conspicuously a heavy loss .
( Such a person ) worships besides Allah that ( idol ) which cannot harm him , nor can bring him benefit . That is indeed straying ( quite ) far off .
He worships someone whose loss is nearer than his profit . What an evil helper and what an evil companion !
Indeed Allah will admit those who believe and keep doing good deeds to the Gardens with streams flowing beneath them . Surely Allah does what He wills .
Whoever thinks that Allah will not at all help His ( beloved and most exalted ) Prophet in the world and in the Hereafter should tie a rope to the ceiling ( of his house ) and then hang and strangle ( himself ) . Then let him see whether his plan removes that ( help of Allah ) at which he feels enraged .
And in the same way We have revealed this ( complete Quran ) in the format of clear , logical arguments . And surely Allah blesses with guidance whom He wills .
Indeed those who believe and those who are the Jews and the Sabeans and the Christians and the Magians and those who are polytheists verily Allah will judge among ( all of ) them on the Day of Resurrection . Surely Allah is witnessing everything .
Have you not seen that to Allah bows in prostration ( the whole creation ) that is in the heavens and in the earth , and the sun , and the moon and the stars , and the mountains , and the vegetable as well as the animal kingdoms and many of mankind ( too ) ? But there are still many ( human beings ) for whom the torment has been proved ( due to their disbelief and polytheism ) . And he whom Allah dishonours none can bring him honour . Indeed Allah does what He wills .
There are two groups who dispute about their Lord . So those who have become disbelievers , the clothes of ( Hell ) Fire have been cut out ( and stitched ) for them . The boiling hot water will be poured over their heads .
With it will melt whatever is in their bellies and also ( their ) skins .
And for them will be hammers of iron ( to strike their heads ) .
Whenever they will intend to get out from there due to intense suffering , they will be turned back into it and ( it will be said to them : ) Taste the torment of fierce Fire .
Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do pious deeds to the Gardens beneath which streams flow . There they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls . And their clothes there will be of silk .
And ( in the world ) they are directed to pure and decent talk and are guided to the favourite path ( of Islam ) .
Surely those who disbelieve and hinder ( others ) from the path of Allah and this Sacred Mosque ( the Kaba ) which We have made equal for all the people ( there is no discrimination ) in it between its inhabitants and the visitors and he who resolves in it to deviate unjustly ( transgress the appointed limits and violate rights ) , We shall make him taste grievous torment .
And ( recall the time ) when We fixed for Ibrahim ( Abraham ) the site of the House of Allah ( for the construction of the Kaba and ordained him : ) Do not associate with Me anything and keep My House ( after its construction ) purified and clean for those who circumambulate it and those who stand and those who kneel and prostrate themselves in Prayer .
And proclaim Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) aloud among the people . They will approach you on foot and ( mounted ) on all lean camels , coming by distant tracks
So that they may avail themselves of their benefits and invoke the Name of Allah as well ( while slaughtering ) over the cattle which Allah has provided for them ( for sacrifice ) , during the appointed days . Then eat of them yourselves and feed the distressed and the needy .
Then let them cleanse their dirt ( i . e . cut their hair and nails on removing Ihram , the Pilgrim attire ) , fulfil their vows ( or the remaining prescribed rituals of Pilgrimage ) and make ( the prescribed farewell ) circumambulation of Allahs Ancient House ( the Kaba ) .
That is ( the Command ) . And whoever venerates the things sanctified before ( the Presence of ) Allah that is better for him in the sight of his Lord . ( All ) the cattle ( i . e . quadrupeds ) are made lawful for you except those whose prohibition has been recited to you . So always keep away from the filth of idols and guard yourselves against telling lies .
Devote yourselves wholly to Allah alone , not associating ( anything as ) partner with Him . And whoever associates anything as partner with Allah , ( his case is as if ) he fell from the sky , then birds snatched him up or the wind blew him away down into a distant place .
That is the ( Command ) . And whoever venerates the Signs of Allah ( i . e . honouring those living beings , shrines , monumental sites , commands and prescribed duties known and recognized due to some pious association or link with Allah or Allahs devoted servants ) , this ( veneration ) is of the Godwariness of hearts ( only those venerate whose hearts have been blessed with fear of God ) .
There are benefits for you in these ( sacrificial animals ) for a fixed term . Then they are to arrive at the Ancient House ( the Kaba for sacrifice ) .
And We have appointed a sacrifice for every people so that ( at the time of sacrifice ) they may invoke the Name of Allah over the cattle ( i . e . quadrupeds ) that Allah has provided for them . And your God is ( only ) One God , so submit to Him alone , and , ( O Beloved , ) give good news to those who remain submissive .
( They are ) the people whose hearts get into fear when Allah is mentioned and they bear with fortitude whatever troubles touch them . And they establish Prayer and give away out of what We have bestowed upon them .
And We have made for you bigger sacrificial animals ( i . e . camels and cows , etc . ) from among the Signs of Allah . There is good in them for you . So line ( them ) up and ( after lancing at the time of their slaughter ) invoke the Name of Allah over them . Then , when they fall down on their sides , eat of it ( too ) and feed those who are sitting contented as well as the ( needy ) who beg . We have this way subjected them to you so that you may give thanks .
It is neither the meat ( of slaughtered animals ) nor their blood that reaches Allah at all but it is the Godwariness that reaches Him from you . Thus has Allah subjected them to you so that you may proclaim Allahs greatness ( while sacrificing ) the way He has guided you . And give glad tidings to those who practise spiritual excellence .
Surely , Allah removes from the men of faith ( the mischief and strife of their enemies ) . Indeed He does not like anyone treacherous ( and ) ungrateful .
Permission ( to fight against mischief , disruption and oppression ) is granted to those against whom ( unjust ) war is waged , because they were oppressed and Allah is doubtlessly All - Powerful to help them ( the oppressed ) .
They are those who were unjustly expelled from their homes simply because they said : Our Lord is Allah . ( i . e . they refused to accept the evil rule ) . And had Allah not been repelling one class of human society by the other ( through progressive struggle and revolutionary toil ) , the cloisters , synagogues , churches and mosques ( i . e . religious centres and worship places of all religions ) would have been ruined where Allahs Name is abundantly commemorated . And whoever helps ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah , Allah surely helps him . Allah is indeed All - Powerfull , Ever - Dominant ( over all i . e . the survival of good is possible only through the revolutionary process of contradiction and conflict between good and evil ) .
( These men of Truth ) are those who , if We establish their rule in the earth , will establish ( systems of ) Prayer , ( organize and control ) paying of Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , enjoin righteousness ( and piousness in the whole society ) and forbid ( people from ) evil . And the result of all the endeavours is in the control of Allah .
And if these ( disbelievers ) reject you then the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and Ad and Thamud ( also ) denied ( their Prophets ) .
And the people of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and ( also ) the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
And the inhabitants of Madyan ( too belied ) . And Musa ( Moses ) was also rejected . So I kept giving respite to ( all ) the disbelievers . Ultimately I seized them . ( Say , ) how terrible was My punishment !
Then how many a town was there which We annihilated because they were oppressors ! They are fallen down on their roofs . And ( owing to their devastation ) how many a well ( was ) deserted and how many a strongly built castle ( is ) lying ruined !
Have they not travelled in the land that ( perhaps by seeing these ruins ) their hearts should become ( such ) as to understand or the ears ( such ) as to hear ( the Truth ) ? So the fact is that it is not the eyes ( of such people ) that are blind , but the hearts turn blind which are in the breasts .
And they seek from you torment in haste and Allah never goes against His promise . And ( when the Hour of torment will come ) then one day ( of torment ) with your Lord is like a thousand years , according to your ( scale of ) counting .
And how many a town I gave respite while it was given to wrongdoing and then I seized it ( with torment ) ! And to Me has ( everyone ) to return .
Say : O people , I am only a Warner to you ( against the torment of Allah ) .
So they who believe and do good deeds , for them is forgiveness and bounty of ( greater ) honour and dignity .
And those who strive in ( refuting ) Our Verses with the idea to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they who are the inmates of Hell .
And We did not send any Messenger and Prophet before you but ( it happened to them all ) that when he ( the Prophet or the Messenger ) would recite ( to the people the Revelations of Allah ) , Satan mixed up in their minds false doubts and absurd ideas of his own with the Verses recited ( by that Prophet ) . Then Allah removes those doubts from the minds of the people which Satan puts ( into the minds of the listeners ) . And then Allah firmly establishes His Verses ( in the hearts of the believers ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
( It happens ) so that Allah may make these ( false ideas and absurd doubts ) which Satan puts ( into their minds ) a trial for those people whose hearts are diseased ( of hypocrisy ) and whose hearts are hardened ( owing to disbelief and disgust ) . And surely the wrongdoers are engaged in serious rivalry .
And so that those who have been given ( true ) knowledge may know that the ( Revelation which the Messenger recited ) is ( based on ) the truth from your Lord , so , they believe in the same ( and reject Satans suggestions ) and their hearts beat in submissiveness ( before the Lord ) . No doubt , Allah does guide the believers to the straight path .
And the disbelievers will always remain in doubt about this ( Holy Quran ) until the Last Hour comes suddenly upon them or the torment of the Day from which salvation is least possible .
On that Day sovereignty will be Allahs alone . He is the One Who will judge among them . So those who believe and do good deeds , will ( reside ) in the Gardens of Bliss .
And those who disbelieve and reject Our Revelations , for them will be humiliating punishment .
And those who migrated from their ( homeland ) in the way of Allah ( and ) were then slain or died ( suffering from troubles in the way of Allah ) , Allah shall indeed provide for them an excellent provision ( of bestowals specific to the Last Day ) . And verily Allah is the Best of providers .
He will indeed admit them to that ( station of divine pleasure ) they will be well pleased with . And Allah is indeed All - Knowing , Most Forbearing .
That is ( the Command ) . And whoever takes revenge in proportion to the torture inflicted upon him and then he is again wronged , Allah will surely help him . Allah is verily Most Forgiving , Most Pardoning .
That is because Allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night , and indeed Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And that is because Allah alone is the Truth , and whatever they ( i . e . the disbelievers ) worship besides Him is certainly falsehood and verily Allah is Most High , Most Great .
Have you not seen that Allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes fresh and green ? Allah is indeed Most Beneficent ( and ) All - Aware .
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , All - Praiseworthy .
Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the earth and ( also ) the vessels that sail in the sea ( and river ) by His Command ( i . e . Law ) and He withholds the heavens ( spatial spheres and atmospheric fields ) from falling on to the earth ( under a cosmic system ) ? But ( when He wills , they will collide ) by His Command . Surely Allah is Most Compassionate , Most Merciful to mankind .
And He is the One Who gave you life , then He causes you to die and then will give you life again . No doubt , it is the man who is highly ungrateful .
We have appointed for every people a way ( of Islamic injunctions or worship and sacrifice ) which they are to act upon . So let them not at all dispute with you over the Command ( of Allah ) . And keep calling towards your Lord . Certainly it is you who are on the straight ( path of ) guidance .
And if they dispute with you then say : Allah knows best whatever you are doing .
Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment all those matters in which you used to disagree .
Do you not know that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? Verily it is all ( recorded ) in the Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) . Surely all that is ( very ) easy for Allah .
And they worship these ( idols ) besides Allah for which He has not sent down any authority . Nor do they have any knowledge of ( the consequence of ) this ( idol - worship ) . And there will be no helper of the wrongdoers ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
And when Our enlightening Verses are recited to the disbelievers , you can clearly see ( signs of ) displeasure ( and resentment ) on their faces . It seems as if they are nearly ready for violent attack on those who are reciting to them Our Signs . Say : ( O restlessly upset disbelievers , ) shall I inform you of something more agonizing than this ? ( That ) is the Fire ( of Hell ) which Allah has promised to the disbelievers . And that is the most evil abode .
O mankind ! An example is given , so listen to it attentively . Verily the ( idols ) you worship besides Allah cannot create ( even ) a fly though they all may join in for this ( purpose ) . And if the fly snatches a thing away from them , they cannot ( even ) recover it from that ( fly ) . How helpless is the seeker ( worshipper ) and the sought ( god ) !
These ( disbelievers ) did not recognize the value of Allah as was His due . Surely , Allah is Most Powerful , Most Dominant ( over everything ) .
Allah chooses His Messengers from among angels and from among men ( as well ) . Surely , Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
He knows ( best ) what is before them and what is behind them . And to Allah are returned all matters .
O Believers ! Persist in kneeling down and prostrating yourselves and worshipping your Lord , and do ( other ) pious deeds consistently so that you may prosper .
And toil hard ( for the establishment and promotion of Allahs Din [ Religion ] , fully charged with His love and obedience , ) as is toil His due . He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any hardship or constriction ( in the matter of ) Din ( Religion ) . This is the Din ( Religion ) of your father Ibrahim ( Abraham ) . He ( Allah ) has named you Muslims in the previous ( Books ) as well as in this ( Holy Quran ) so that this ( Last of the ) Messengers may be a witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind . So , ( to sustain this status ) establish Prayer , pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and hold fast to ( the Embrace of ) Allah . He ( alone ) is your Helper ( Patron ) . So what an excellent Patron and what an excellent Helper is He !
Certainly the believers have attained their goal .
Those who become most humble and submissive in their Prayer .
And who ( always ) keep away from absurd talk .
And who ( always ) pay Zakat ( the Alms - due [ and keep purifying their wealth and souls ] ) .
And who guard their private parts ( all the time ) .
Except from their wives or those slave - girls who are the possessions of their hands . ( If they go to them according to the Islamic injunctions ) , there is surely no blame on them .
But whoever desires someone beyond these ( lawful women ) , it is these people who are transgressors ( and disobedient ) .
And those who are watchful of their trusts and their pledges .
And who guard their Prayers ( with persistence ) .
It is they who will be the inheritors ( of Paradise ) .
They will inherit ( also ) the most superior Gardens of Paradise ( where all the bounties , comforts and pleasures of nearness to Allah will abound ) . They will live there forever .
And indeed We originated ( the genesis of ) man from the extract of ( chemical ingredients of ) clay .
Then We placed him as a sperm drop ( zygote ) in a secure place ( mothers womb ) .
Then We made that zygote a hanging mass ( clinging to the uterus like a leech ) . Then We developed that hanging mass into a lump , looking chewed with teeth . Out of this chewed lump We built a structure of bones which We clothed with flesh ( and muscles ) . Then ( changing him ) into another form We developed him ( gradually ) into a new creation . Then Allah brought ( him up into a strong body ) , Allah the Best of creators .
Then certainly after this ( life ) you shall die .
Then indeed on the Day of Resurrection you will be raised up ( after brought to life ) .
And surely We have created above you seven paths ( i . e . seven magnetic paths or fields , around the vast atmospheric expanse of the planet earth , for the safeguard of the cosmic system ) . And We were not unaware of the creation ( of the universe and the pre - requisites of its security ) .
And We showered water persistently ( for a long time ) from the clouds according to an estimated measure . So ( when the earth became cool then ) We lodged this water in ( the depressions and depths of ) the earth ( shaping into preliminary forms of oceans ) . And verily We have the power to make it evaporate ( as vapours ) .
Then by means of this We caused to grow for you ( step by step firstly herbs , then plants and then trees and ) the gardens of dates and grapes . ( Furthermore , We created ) for you many ( other ) fruits of which you eat ( now ) .
And ( We have also created for you the olive ) tree which grows forth from the Mount Sinai , ( and ) contains oil , and is a curry for those who eat .
And for you indeed there are ( also ) aspects to the cattle that need contemplation : We make you drink ( milk We prepare from some ingredients ) of what is in their bellies . And there are for you ( also ) many ( other ) benefits in them , and you eat ( some ) of them ( as well ) .
And you are ( also ) borne upon them and on boats .
And surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . He said : O people , always worship Allah . There is no God for you other than He . So do you not fear ?
Then the chiefs ( and the lords ) of his people who disbelieved said : This man is just a human being like you , ( nothing else ) . He seeks to establish ( his ) superiority and predominance over you . And if Allah wanted ( to send some Messenger for guidance ) , He would send down angels . We have never heard of it from our ancestors ( that a human being like us should be appointed as our Messenger ) .
He is nothing but a man ( afflicted ) with madness . So wait for him for a while ( and keep an eye on what he does next ) .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord , help me because they have rejected me .
Then We revealed to him : Build an Ark under Our supervision according to Our Command . So when Our Command ( for torment ) comes and the ( water - filled ) oven starts overflowing , load into it of every kind of animals two pairs each ( male and female ) and also your family except that one among them about whom the Command ( of torment ) has already been issued . And also do not supplicate Me concerning those who have wronged ( by denying and mocking you ) . They shall ( surely ) be drowned .
So when you and the ( people ) accompanying you get settled in the Ark then say : All praise be to Allah alone , Who has delivered us from the unjust people .
And submit : O my Lord , land me at a blessed destination , and You are the Best of all Who bring to land .
Surely in this ( event ) there are ( many ) Signs and We do certainly make trials .
Then We raised after them another community .
So We sent among them ( also ) a Messenger from among themselves : Worship Allah . There is no God for you other than He . So do you not fear ?
And proclaimed the chiefs ( and the lords ) of his people ( too ) who disbelieved and rejected the meeting of the Hereafter and whom We had ( also ) given prosperity ( on account of riches and abundant wealth ) in worldly life ( they said to the people ) : He is only a human being like you . He eats what you eat and drinks what you drink .
And if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you shall be the sure losers .
Does he promise you that , when you die and become dust and ( decomposed ) bones , then you will be brought forth ( alive again ) ?
Far ( from understanding ) , far ( off from likelihood ) are the things you are being promised .
There is nothing ( like life after death ) . Our life is only this world . We live and die ( here alone ) and ( that is all ) . We shall not be raised up ( again ) .
He is merely a man who has put a false blame on Allah , and we are not going to believe in him at all .
( The Prophet ) submitted : O my Lord , help me in the circumstances that they have rejected me .
( Allah ) said : They will repent in a little while .
So , according to the true promise , the dreadful Blast seized them and We made them a waste of withered grass . Far distant from and deprived ( of Our Mercy ) are the unjust and wrongdoing people .
Later We raised after them other communities ( one after the other ) .
No community can step ahead of their appointed time , nor can they step back .
Then We sent Our Messengers one after the other . Whenever there came to a community their Messenger , they rejected him . Then We also destroyed them one after another ( by successive torments ) and We reduced them to mere tales . So woe to the people who do not believe !
Then We sent Musa ( Moses ) and his brother Harun ( Aaron ) with Our Signs and an evident authority .
To Pharaoh and the chiefs ( of his people ) . They too behaved with arrogance and conceit . And they too were ( extremely ) wrongdoing and disobedient people .
So they ( also ) said ( the same ) : Shall we believe in two human beings like ourselves while their people worship us ?
They ( also ) belied both of them . So they too became of those who were eliminated .
And indeed We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book so that they might take guidance .
And We made Isa ( Jesus ) son of Maryam ( Mary ) and his mother Our ( Great ) Sign . And We provided them a comfortable and facilitated living place on a pleasant , elevated ground fit for living with ease and comfort , and there was flowing water ( i . e . streams , waterfalls and springs a feast ) for sight .
O ( My Esteemed ) Messengers ! Eat of the pure things ( as your practice is ) and do good deeds with persistence . Surely I am Well Aware of whatever ( deed ) you do .
And surely this is your Umma ( [ Community ] which is in fact ) but one Umma ( Community ) and I am your Lord . Therefore , always fear Me .
But they broke the command of their Din [ Religion ] into sects by disagreeing among themselves . Each sect is glad with that much ( portion of Din [ Religion ] ) which they have .
So leave them ditched in their ignorance and error for a time .
Do they think that the help We are giving them ( in this world ) in the shape of wealth and children .
( Implies that ) We are hastening ( the provision of ) good things to them ? ( No way ! ) The truth is that they have no awareness .
Indeed those who remain restless and tremble with fear of their Lord .
And those who believe in the Revelations of their Lord .
And those who do not associate ( any ) partners with their Lord .
And those who give away ( in the way of Allah as much ) as they can , yet ( in spite of that ) their hearts fear that they are to return to their Lord ( lest it should be rejected ) .
It is these people who are hastening in ( collecting ) good works and it is they who excel in this pursuit .
And We do not strain any soul but commensurate with its capacity , and with Us is the record ( of deeds ) which will speak the truth , and they will not be wronged .
But their hearts are in ( utter ) negligence of this ( message of the Quran ) and ( also ) besides that there are many other ( evil ) deeds which they are doing .
Until when We seize the rich and the prosperous of them with torment , then they will cry out .
( It will be said to them : ) Do not cry today . Surely you shall not be helped by Us .
Certainly , My Verses were repeatedly recited to you but you used to turn back on your heels .
Displaying haughtiness and arrogance against it , you used to utter absurdity in the darkness of night .
So have they not pondered over this Command ( of Allah ) ? Or has there come to them such a thing that did not come to their fathers ?
Or have they not recognized their Messenger and ( so ) they deny him ?
Or do they say : He ( the Prophet ) is ( afflicted ) with mania ? ( Nay , not at all ; ) he has rather brought to them the Truth but most of them do not like the Truth .
And had the ( Holy ) Truth ( Allah ) followed their vain desires then ( all ) the heavens and the earth and whatever ( living and non - living things ) are therein , all would have been destroyed . We have rather brought them that ( Quran ) which contains ( the secret of ) their honour , dignity ( and fame ) . So it is from their own honour that they are turning away .
Do you demand of them any recompense ( for preaching the faith in Messengership ? Nay , that too is not the case . ) The recompense of your Lord itself is ( by far ) the best and He is the Best of all sustainers .
And surely you call them to the straight path ( for their own good ) .
And surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter remain deviated from the ( straight ) path .
And if We have mercy on them and remove the distress that has ( afflicted ) them , they will become hardened in their transgression wandering disorientated .
And indeed We seized them with torment , but ( still ) they did not adopt submissiveness to their Lord , nor did they entreat in humility ( before His Presence ) .
Until when We open to them the gate of an extremely harsh torment , ( then , ) at that time , taken aback , they will ( stay ) therein stunned in despair .
And He is the One Who ( gradually ) made for you ears and eyes and hearts ( and minds ) but you give very little thanks .
And He is the One Who created and then scattered you in the earth and before Him will you be gathered .
And He is the One Who gives life and causes death and in His control is ( also ) the alternation of night and day . So do you not understand ?
But these people ( too ) utter similar words that the former ( disbelievers ) used to utter .
They say : When we die and turn into dust and ( decomposed ) bones , then shall we be raised up ( after given life again ) ?
Surely this is what we and our fathers have ( also ) been promised . These ( sayings ) are but the tales of the bygone people .
Say ( to them ) : To whom belongs the earth and everyone ( living ) in it , if you know ( anything ) ?
They will promptly say : ( All ) belongs to Allah . ( Then ) say : Then why do you not accept guidance ?
Ask ( them ) : Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Mighty Throne ( i . e . the Sovereign Authority of the entire universe ) ?
They will spontaneously say : ( All ) this belongs to Allah . Say : Why do you not fear then ?
Say ( to them ) : Who is He in Whose Mighty Hand is the Absolute Ownership of everything and Who gives asylum but against Whom no asylum can be given , if you know ( anything ) ?
They will readily say : That is all Allahs ( Glory ) . So , say : From where then are you being deceived ( as if under a spell ) ?
The fact is that We have brought them the Truth and they are liars without any doubt .
Allah has not taken ( to Himself ) any son , nor is there any god with Him . In that case each god would certainly have taken ( away ) what he had created and they would surely have dominated each other ( and the whole universe would have undergone violence and chaos ) . Glorified is Allah , above all that they describe .
( He ) is the Knower of ( all things ) hidden and disclosed . So He is Exalted , High above all what they associate with Him .
( Pray : ) O my Lord , if You would show me that ( torment ) which they are being promised .
( Then , ) my Lord , put me not among the unjust people .
And We certainly have the Power to show you that ( torment ) of which We are making them a promise .
Repel evil in such a way as is best of all . We know best ( the things ) they say .
And say , ( praying ) : O my Lord , I seek Your shelter from promptings of satans .
And , O my Lord , also I seek refuge with You lest they should come to me .
Until when death comes to anyone of them , ( then ) he will say : O my Lord , send me back ( to the world ) .
So that I may do some righteous works in that ( world ) which I have left behind . No way ! He will be saying this ( only in despair ) . And ahead of them is a barrier ( erected ) till the Day ( when ) they will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
Then when the trumpet will be blown neither any relation will remain ( intact ) among them that Day , nor they will be able to ask of one another .
So they whose scales will weigh heavy ( due to greater number of good deeds ) will be successful and prosperous .
And the ones whose scales will be light ( due to little weight of good deeds ) it is they who have harmed themselves . They are permanent residents of Hell .
The Fire will burn their faces and they will be lying in it with teeth bulging out and mouths deformed .
( It will be said to them : ) Were My Revelations not repeatedly recited to you , and then you used to belie them ?
They will say : O our Lord , our misfortune overwhelmed us , and surely we were the misguided people .
O our Lord ! Take us out from here . Then if we repeat ( the same error ) we shall certainly be the wrongdoers .
( Allah will ) say : Stay on therein with disgrace and do not speak to Me .
Indeed there was a party of My servants who used to submit ( before My Presence ) : O our Lord , we have believed , so forgive us and have Mercy on us . And ( surely ) You are the Best of the merciful .
But you used to laugh at them till they made you forget My remembrance and you ( just ) continued making fun of them .
This Day I have bestowed upon them ( this ) reward for their patience that they have triumphed .
( Allah ) will say : How many years have you stayed in the earth ?
They will say : We might have stayed there a day or part of a day , but ask those who work out statistics .
( Allah ) will say : You stayed there but very little . Would that you knew ( it there ) !
So did you think that We had created you in vain ( without any purpose ) and that you would not return to Us ?
So Allah the True Sovereign is High and Exalted . There is no God but He . He alone is the Lord of the Venerated Throne ( Authority ) .
And anyone who worships another god along with Allah has no proof of this . So he will be accountable for that to his Lord alone . Surely , the disbelievers will not be successful .
And submit : O my Lord , forgive and have Mercy and You ( alone ) are the Best of those who have mercy .
This is a ( great ) Sura which We have revealed and We have made its ( Commandments ) obligatory . And We have sent down in it clear Revelations so that you may take direction and guidance .
Whip a hundred lashes each , the ( unmarried ) adulteress and the adulterer ( on validation of adultery in accordance with conditions of statutory [ hadd ] punishment . If married , then both are to be stoned to death ) . And you should not feel even the slightest pity for both of them ( in executing the command of Din [ Religion ] ) if you have faith in Allah and the Last Day . And a ( sizeable ) party of Muslims should be present on ( the occasion of ) award of punishment to both of them .
An adulterer does not ( like to ) marry ( a chaste and virtuous woman ) but only an adulteress or a polytheist , and no ( pious man likes to ) marry an adulteress ( too ) but only an adulterer or a polytheist . And this act ( adultery ) has been forbidden to the Muslims .
And those who accuse chaste women ( of adultery ) , then fail to produce four witnesses , whip them eighty lashes ( as qadhaf punishment for false accusation ) and never accept their evidence . And it is they who are the evildoers .
Except for those who repent after this ( false blaming ) and mend their ways . Then Allah is verily Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful . ( They will not be counted among the disobedient , but this will not exempt them from hadd al - qadhaf [ the penalty for false accusation ] . )
And those who accuse their wives ( of adultery ) and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of such a person would be to swear ( himself ) four times by Allah that he is truthful ( in his accusation ) .
And the fifth time ( to say ) that Allahs curse be upon him if he is a liar .
And ( similarly ) this can avert punishment from that ( woman as well ) if she ( herself ) gives evidence , swearing four times by Allah that he ( the husband ) is a liar ( in accusing her ) .
And the fifth time ( to say ) that Allahs wrath be upon her ( i . e . me ) if he ( the husband ) is truthful .
And had there not been Allahs Grace and Mercy upon you ( then you would have been more perturbed under such circumstances ) and Allah is surely Most Relenting , All - Wise .
Surely those who fabricated the accusation ( against Aisha the truthful , the pure , the chaste may Allah be well pleased with her ) were ( also ) a party from among you . Do not consider this ( slander account ) as a bad thing for you . It has rather ( turned out to be ) good for you . Everyone of them has a share in the sin as much as he has earned it , but whoever has had major share in this ( false accusation ) , for him is a terrible torment .
Why did it not happen that when you heard of it ( the slander ) the believers , both men and women , would think good of their own people and say : This is obviously a fabricated accusation ( based on falsehood ) ?
Why did these ( slanderers ) not produce four witnesses to this ( turmoil ) ? Since they could not bring forth witnesses , it is certainly they who are liars in the sight of Allah .
And had there not been Allahs Grace upon you and His Mercy in this world and in the Hereafter , severe torment would have afflicted you for promoting that ( slander ) into which you rushed headlong .
When ( hearing this matter from one another ) you brought it on your tongues and uttered with your mouths something about which you ( yourselves ) had no knowledge , and you took ( propagation of ) this matter as inconsiderable , whereas in the Presence of Allah it was a grave ( offence underway ) .
And when you heard of this ( heinous charge ) , why did you not declare ( at the same moment ) : It is not ( at all justified ) for us to talk about it ? ( Rather you should have said : O Allah , ) Holy are You ( High above making such a woman the beloved wife of Your beloved and Esteemed Messenger ) . This is a grave charge .
Allah admonishes you never ever to repeat such a thing ( in your lifetime ) , if you are believers .
And Allah explains to you the Revelations with utmost clarity . And Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
Indeed those who like that lewdness should spread among the Muslims , for them is agonizing punishment in this world and in the Hereafter . And Allah knows ( the intentions of such people ) and you do not know .
And had there not been Allahs Grace and His Mercy upon you ( for the sake of the Holy Prophet , you too would have been destroyed like the former communities ) . But Allah is Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan , and whoever follows the footsteps of Satan , then he ( Satan ) certainly commands to practise ( and promote ) immorality and sinful deeds . And if there had not been Allahs Grace and His Mercy upon you then none of you would ever have been pure ( from the stain of the sin of slander ) . But Allah purifies whom He wills and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( now ) those of you who are exalted ( Din Religionwise ) and affluent ( worldwise ) must not swear that they will not provide ( financial help ) to the relatives , the needy and the emigrants ( who were involved in this offence of false accusation ) . They should forgive ( their misconduct ) and overlook ( their mistake ) . Do you not like that Allah should forgive you ? And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Verily those who falsely accuse chaste believing women who are unaware of and unacquainted ( with even the very idea of indecency and evil ) are cursed in this world and in the Hereafter . And for them is woeful punishment .
On the Day when their ( own ) tongues and their hands and their feet will bear witness against them for whatever they used to do .
On that Day Allah will pay them full recompense that they truly deserve ( for their deeds ) . And they will come to know that Allah is ( Himself ) the Truth ( and also ) the Revealer ( of the Truth ) .
Unclean women are ( particular ) for unclean men while unclean men are meant for unclean women . And ( likewise ) clean and chaste women are ( specific ) to clean and pious men while clean and pious men are exclusively for clean and chaste women . ( So keeping in view the holiness , sanctity and purity of the Holy Prophet , you yourselves could imagine how pure , wholesome and chaste a wife Allah would have raised for him . ) These ( pure , innocent and divine people ) are totally free from these ( slanders ) which these ( foul - mouthed ) people are levelling . Forgiveness and bestowal of honour and dignity have been ( destined ) for them . ( Why do you ruin your life after death and earn disgrace and humiliation by denigrating his glory ? )
O Believers ! Do not enter houses other than your own until you obtain their permission . And greet their residents ( immediately after you enter ) . This ( advice ) is better for you so that you may contemplate ( its rationale ) .
Then , if you do not find anyone in these ( houses ) , do not enter them until you are granted permission ( for that ) . And if it is said to you : Go back , then do go back . That is purer for you , and Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
There is no sin on you if you enter ( without permission ) those houses ( or buildings ) which are not any permanent residences ( such as hotels , roadhouses and inns ) . You have the right to get benefit therein . And Allah knows ( all ) that you disclose and that you conceal .
Direct the believing men to keep their eyes always lowered and guard their private parts . That is purer for them . Surely Allah is Well Aware of the ( works ) which they are busy doing .
And direct the believing women that they ( too ) must keep their eyes lowered and guard their chastity , and must not show off their adornments and beautification except that ( part of it ) which becomes visible itself . And they must keep their veils ( and head - coverings ) drawn over their chests and breasts ( too ) , and must not display their adornments ( to anyone ) except their husbands , or their fathers or the fathers of their husbands , or their sons or the sons of their husbands , or their brothers or the sons of their brothers or the sons of their sisters , or ( the women of ) their ( own faith , the Muslim ) women or their female slaves or such male servants as are free from any lust and sexual urge , or the children who ( being minor ) have ( yet ) no sense of womens private parts . ( They too are exceptions . ) Nor must they ( while walking ) strike their feet ( on the ground in such a manner that ornaments jingle and ) thus get revealed and known which they are keeping hidden ( under the command of Sharia ) . And turn to Allah all of you in repentance , O believers , so that you may prosper ( by implementing these Commandments ) .
And marry those of your men and women who are leading an unmarried life ( despite reaching the age of marriage ) , and also ( marry ) those of your male and female slaves who are capable . If they are poor , Allah will make them rich out of His Bounty and Allah is Most Infinite , All - Knowing .
And those who cannot afford marriage ( for lack of financial means ) should adopt chastity until Allah enriches them out of His Bounty . And from among ( the male and female slaves ) under your control those who seek to write out a deed ( of manumission freedom through earning and paying , ) write it for them , and free them ( under the given condition ) if you see any good in them . Pay them ( also yourselves ) out of that wealth which Allah has given you ( to help them get freedom ) . And do not force your maids into prostitution if they desire to keep themselves chaste ( or wish to safeguard their chastity through marriage ) . And whoever will compel them , then ( even ) after they are compelled Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And surely We have sent down to you evident and enlightening Revelations and some examples of those who have passed away before you ( i . e . like Aishas story , the story of Maryam [ Mary ] and the story of Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) . And ( this ) is for the direction and guidance of the Godfearing .
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth .
The likeness of His Light ( which is glowing in the world in the form of Muhammads Light ) is as a niche - like ( sacred breast ) wherein is glowing the lamp ( of Prophethood ) ,
the lamp contained in a crystal globe ( the radiant heart of Muhammad ) .
This globe is ( as dazzlingly bright owing to reflection of Allahs Light ) as a glittering star .
( This lamp of Prophethood ) is lit with the sacred olive tree ( i . e . either due to the blissful communication of divine Revelation from the Realm of Divinity or owing to the blissful genealogical tree of the Prophets and the Messengers ) .
It is neither ( merely ) eastern nor western ( rather universal and cosmic in its generously infinite luminosity .
The likeness of this lamp of Prophethood is as if ) its oil ( i . e . Light , due to its genuine and inherent potential capability ) is glowing , though no fire ( or the radiation of celestial miracles and divine revelation ) has even touched it yet .
( So it ) is Light upon Light ( i . e . the Light of Prophethood upon the Light of the Holy Essence , denoting a Self - embodying double Light ) .
Allah takes to ( the gnosis of ) His Light whom He wills .
And Allah explains similitudes for ( the Guidance of ) people and Allah is Well Aware of everything .
( This Light of Allah illumines ) such houses ( mosques and centres ) which Allah has ordained to exalt ( i . e . enhance their esteem and honour ) and remember His Name therein . ( These are the houses ) in which ( Allahs servants ) glorify Him morning and evening .
( Blessed with this Light ) are those servants of ( Allah ) whom neither trade nor sale diverts from the remembrance of Allah , and from establishing Prayer and paying Zakat ( the Alms - due . Even while performing their worldly duties ) they keep fearing the Day when hearts and eyes will ( all ) overturn ( with terror ) .
So that Allah may give them best reward for the ( good ) deeds they have done and may bestow upon them ( still ) more out of His Bounty . And Allah blesses with sustenance ( and provisions ) without measure whom He wills .
And the deeds of the disbelievers are like a mirage in a vast barren field which the thirsty one deems to be water , until when he gets near it he finds it to be nothing . ( Likewise in the Hereafter ) he would find Allah near him but Allah fully paid him back ( in the world ) . And Allah is Swift in taking account .
Or ( the disbelievers deeds are like ) the darkness in a deep sea covered by a wave , rolled upon ( yet ) by another wave and above that are clouds . ( This ) darkness is ( in layers ) one over another . When ( a person drowning into such a sea ) stretches his hand out , ( none ) can see it . And he for whom Allah has not formed any light ( of guidance ) , for him there is no light ( anywhere ) .
Have you not seen that ( all ) who are in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah alone , and the birds ( too in the air around ) with wings outspread ( do celebrate His praise ) ? Each one knows his own mode of Prayer and praise ( before the Presence of Allah ) . And Allah is Well Aware of the deeds they accomplish .
To Allah alone belongs the sovereignty of all the heavens and the earth and to Him shall all return .
Have you not seen that Allah is the One Who drives the cloud ( first ) gently , then joins its ( various pieces ) together , and then forms them into layers upon layers ? Then you see that from spaces between them rain issues forth and falls down . And He sends down hail from the clouds ( looking ) like snow - covered mountains in the same sky ( i . e . atmosphere ) . And then He throws it down upon whom He wills and turns it away from whom He likes . ( Moreover , He creates lightning from the same clouds . ) It seems as if the flash of the lightning ( of clouds ) would ( dazzle their eyes and ) snatch their sight away .
And Allah turns about the night and the day ( over each other ) . Surely there is ( great ) guidance in it for those who have reason and insight .
And Allah has originated ( chemical genesis of ) every moving creature from water . So , some of them creep on their bellies , some walk on two feet and some others on four . Allah creates what He wills . Surely Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
We have , indeed , sent down clear and enlightening Revelations ( through which ) Allah guides whom He wills to the straight path .
And they say : We have believed in Allah and the Messenger and we obey . Then after ( saying ) this a group of them turns away ( from their affirmation ) . And ( in fact ) these people are not ( at all ) believers .
And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) that he may judge between them , a party of them turns away ( from appearing before the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
And had they been in the right , they would have come fast to him ( the Messenger ) most submissively .
Is there a disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts ? Or do they doubt ( the majesty and glory of the Messenger ) ? Or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger will do them wrong ? ( Nay , ) they themselves are the wrongdoers .
The only saying of the believers , when they are called to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in order that he may judge between them , is that they say : We have heard and we ( totally ) submit to obey . It is they who will prosper .
And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and fears Allah and adopts Godwariness for Him , it is they who will achieve their goal .
And they swear most strongly ( and solemnly ) by Allah that if you order them , they shall certainly set out ( for Jihad [ the Sacred Struggle ] ) . Say : Do not swear . It is obedience that is ( required ) as per law . Allah is certainly Well Aware of the deeds you do .
Say : Obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , but if you turn away ( from obedience ) then ( beware that ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is simply responsible for the duty he is charged with and you are responsible for what you are charged with . And if you obey him you will be guided . And nothing is ( obligatory ) for the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) but to convey ( the Commands ) clearly .
To those of you who believe and keep doing pious deeds Allah has given the promise ( whose fulfilment and implementation is obligatory for the Umma [ Community ] ) : He will surely bestow upon them Khilafa ( the trust of right to rule ) as He granted ( the right to ) rule to those who were before them . And ( through dominance and rule ) He will strengthen and stabilize their Din ( Religion ) for them which He has liked for them , and ( by this strength and rule ) He will for sure change their former state of fear ( which was due to their political , economic and social handicap ) to that of peace and security . They will worship Me ( fearlessly and ) will not associate any partner with Me ( i . e . will follow and obey only My Command and System ) . And after this whoever adopts ingratitude ( i . e . aversion to and denial of My Commands ) it is they who will be defiant ( and disobedient ) .
And establish ( the system of ) Prayers and ( ensure ) the payment of Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and accomplish ( absolute ) obedience to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) so that you may be granted mercy ( i . e . the blessings of sovereign rule , stability , peace and security may endure and continue ) .
And let it not occur to you at all that those who disbelieve and are ungrateful will make ( Allah ) powerless ( to destroy them ) in the earth . And Hell is their abode and the worst is that abode .
O Believers ! Your ( male and female ) slaves and your children who have not yet attained puberty must seek your permission ( to come to you ) on three occasions : ( first ) before Fajr ( dawn ) Prayer , ( second ) when you put off your clothes at noon ( for rest ) and ( third ) after Isha ( night ) Prayer ( when you go to bed for sleep . These are ) the three ( times ) of privacy for you . Other than these ( times ) , there is no sin on you or them ( because during remaining hours they ) keep coming and going frequently where you are from one to the other . That is how Allah makes clear the Revelations for you , and Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
And when the children from among you reach puberty they must also seek your permission ( to come to you ) as ( other elders ) have been doing before them . That is how Allah makes clear His Commands for you . And Allah is All - Knowing All - Wise .
And there is no sin on those elderly house - confined women who have no desire ( now ) for marriage if they lay aside their garments ( i . e . additional outer coverings ) , provided they ( too ) do not show their adornment . And if they are ( more ) committed to self - restraint ( i . e . do not remove additional outer coverings as well ) that is better for them . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
There is no restriction on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor is there any sin on the sick and nor ( any harm ) for you if you eat ( food ) from your own houses or from the houses of your fathers , or the houses of your mothers , or the houses of your brothers , or the houses of your sisters , or the houses of your fathers brothers , or the houses of your fathers sisters , or the houses of your mothers brothers , or the houses of your mothers sisters , or the houses whose keys are in your charge ( i . e . whose owners have permitted you for any use . Nor is there any harm to eat food ) from your friends houses . There is no sin on you whether you all eat together or separately . Then when you enter the houses greet ( the members of ) your ( family ) with the greeting of peace and security . ( This ) is a blissful and pure greeting from Allah . Thus Allah makes clear His Verses for you so that you may understand ( the commands of the Sharia and manners of life ) .
The believers are only those who have believed in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , and when they are with you for some ( collective ) issue which brings ( the people ) together , then they should not go away from there ( i . e . they should participate whole - heartedly to work for collective coherence and unity among the Umma [ Community ] ) until they have obtained permission from you ( owing to some special excuse . O Esteemed Prophet , ) surely those who seek permission from you ( believing your Majesty the Supreme and Ultimate Authority ) it is they who are the believers in Allah and His Prophet . So when they seek from you permission ( to go ) for some affair of theirs , then ( you are the Supreme Sovereign Authority ) . Grant leave whom you please and ask forgiveness for them from Allah ( even on going away from your company by obtaining your permission , lest they should be seized even on that ) . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Muslims ! ) Do not regard the calling of the Prophet among you like your calling of one another . ( When calling the Holy Prophet is not like your mutual calling among you , then how can the Holy Personality of the Prophet be like yours ? ) Surely Allah knows those from among you ( well ) who slip away quietly ( from the presence of the Holy Prophet ) under the shelter of one another . So let those who go against the Messengers command ( of veneration and devotion ) feel afraid lest some trial should overtake them ( here in the world ) or a painful torment seize them in the Hereafter .
Beware ! To Allah belongs ( all ) that is in the heavens and in the earth . He certainly knows your state of mind ( i . e . state of belief or that of hypocrisy ) . And on the Day when they will be returned to Him , He will disclose to them what they used to do and Allah knows everything full well .
Blessed is He ( Allah ) Who sent down to His ( most beloved and most intimate ) servant the Criterion ( the Quran ) that ( draws the difference between right and wrong and ) gives judgment in order that he may be a Warner to all the worlds .
He ( Allah ) to Whom belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth , and Who has not taken ( to Himself ) any children , nor has He any partner in His Kingdom and He alone has created everything , and then destined ( i . e . formatted ) it exactly according to a definite estimation ( its features , functions , time frame and everything for all the stages of its growth and survival ) .
And these ( polytheists ) have taken besides Him other gods which cannot create anything and are themselves created and possess no power either to harm or to benefit themselves and control neither death nor life , nor ( have they any authority ) to raise up ( after death ) and assemble .
And the disbelievers say : This ( Quran ) is but a lie which this ( claimant of Prophethood ) has fabricated and other people have helped him in ( inventing ) it . Surely the disbelievers have come down to sheer injustice and falsehood .
And they say : ( This Quran comprises ) fables of the ancients which this man has got written ; then these ( fables ) are recited to him morning and evening ( in order to memorize and narrate further ) .
Say : He ( Allah ) has sent down this ( Quran ) Who knows all the secrets ( present ) in the heavens and the earth . Surely He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And they say : What is the matter with this Messenger ? He eats food and walks about in the marketplaces . Why has an angel not been sent down to him that he might ( join ) him as a Warner ?
Or a treasure should have been sent down to him or ( at least ) he should have owned a garden so that he might eat ( of its income ) . And the wrongdoers say ( to the Muslims ) : You are following but a man spellbound .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Just see what sort of comparisons they utter for you . So they have gone astray and cannot find any path ( to Guidance ) .
Most Blessed is He . If He pleases He can produce gardens for you ( far ) better than these ( here in the world ) beneath which streams flow , and raise for you magnificent palaces ( but these are not the conditions for a Prophet and Messenger ) .
But they have denied the Last Hour ( as well ) , and for everyone who denies the Last Hour We have prepared the blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
When that ( Fire of Hell ) will be visible to them ( even ) from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
And when , tightly bound ( together or bound to their satans , ) they will be thrown into it from some narrow place , then they will cry out for ( their ) destruction .
( It will be said to them : ) Do not call out ( just ) for one destruction today but call for many more destructions .
Say : Is this ( a ) better ( state ) or the ( life of ) eternal Paradise promised to the Godfearing ? This is their reward ( of deeds ) and their abode .
( All ) that they long for will be ( available ) for them in these ( gardens of Paradise ) . They shall live ( in it ) for ever . That is a coveted promise which your Lord has made a ( bountiful ) obligation upon Himself ( and which will surely be fulfilled ) .
And on that Day Allah will assemble them together with those they worshipped besides Allah . He will then say : Was it you who led these My servants astray or did they ( themselves ) go astray from the path ?
They will say : Glory be to You . It did not become us ( even ) to take friends other than You ( let alone asking them to worship others besides You ) . But , ( O Lord , ) You bestowed upon them and their fathers worldly riches to such an extent that they forgot ( even ) Your Remembrance . And these were but the ( doomed ) people to be destroyed .
( O disbelievers ! ) They have denied what you said . So , ( now ) you can neither avert the torment nor help yourselves . And , ( listen , ) whoever of you does injustice We will make him taste mighty torment .
And We did not send Messengers before you but ( that ) they certainly ate food and also walked about in the marketplaces ( as needed ) . And We have made you a trial for one another . Will you observe patience ( in trial ) ? And your Lord is All - Seeing .
And those who do not hope for meeting with Us say : Why were angels not sent down to us ? Or if we could see our Lord ( with our own eyes , we would certainly believe ) . In fact they esteem ( themselves ) very highly in their hearts and are rebelling beyond bounds .
The Day when they will see the angels , there will be no matter of joy for the evildoers anyway on that Day . They will rather say ( frightened on seeing them ) : Would that there were a barricade ( which could save us from them ! Or the angles , on seeing them , will say : Entry to Paradise is totally forbidden for you . )
And ( then ) We shall turn to the deeds they ( presumably ) did ( in life ) and shall make them scattered dust particles .
On that Day , the lodging for the inmates of Paradise will be the best and their resting place ( too ) will be excellent ( where they will retire for a nap after the reckoning noon ) .
And that Day the sky will be rent asunder , changed into ( the resemblance of smoke , like ) a cloud , and the angels will be sent down ranks upon ranks .
That Day True Sovereignty will belong to the Most Kind ( Lord ) and that will be very hard ( i . e . tough ) Day on the disbelievers .
And that Day every wrongdoer will bite his hands ( in fury and frustration and ) will say : Would that I had taken the path ( of Guidance by joining ) the companionship of the Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) !
Ah ! Woe to me ! Would that I had not taken such a one for a friend !
Surely he led me astray from the direction and guidance after it had come to me , and Satan leaves man helpless and forlorn ( in the time of distress ) .
And the ( Holy ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) will submit : O Lord , surely my people had utterly abandoned this Quran .
And that is how We made for every Prophet ( their ) enemy from the evildoers ( who used to oppose their Prophetic mission , and this way , a conflict between the forces of right and wrong would develop and a favourable and congenial environment for revolution would take shape against tyranny , oppression and injustice ) . And your Lord is sufficient to guide and help .
And the disbelievers say : Why has the Quran not been ( put together and ) sent down to this ( Prophet ) in one go ? It has been revealed gradually ( piecemeal ) so that by this We may strengthen your ( most sanctified ) heart , and ( that is why ) We have recited it gradually with pauses ( in order that your heart may feel tranquil by receiving Our Message again and again ) .
And these ( disbelievers ) do not bring to you any ( such ) instance ( as an objection or inquiry ) , but We provide you with the Truth ( to reply it ) and an explanation better ( than that ) .
( They ) are such people as will be driven headlong towards Hell . It is they who are the worst ones as for their abode and are ( also ) much distracted from the ( straight ) path .
And surely We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book and appointed his brother Harun ( Aaron ) with him as his minister ( for his help ) .
Then We said : Go both of you to the people who have rejected Our Signs . ( But when , despite that , they did not abstain from belying Us ) We totally destroyed them .
And the people of Nuh ( [ Noah ] as well ) when they denied the Prophets , We drowned them and made them a Sign of warning for ( other ) people . And We have prepared a painful torment for the wrongdoers .
And ( We also annihilated ) ? d and Thamud and the residents of Rass and many ( other ) people in between .
And We explained examples to each one ( of them for direction and guidance , ) but ( when they did not refrain from rebellion ) We wiped them off completely .
And certainly these ( disbelievers ) have passed by that town on which was showered a disastrous rain ( of stones ) . Did they not see that ( ruined town ) ? But the truth is that they do not expect to be raised up ( after death ) .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) when they see you they do nothing but make fun of you ( and say : ) Is this ( the one ) Allah has sent as a Messenger ?
He had nearly turned us away from our gods , had we not held fast to their ( worship ) . And when they see the torment , they will soon realize who was astray .
Have you seen him who has taken the desire of his lower self as god ? Would you then become a guardian over him ?
Do you think that most of them hear or understand ? ( Nay , ) they have become like cattle , rather worse in error than they are .
Have you not had a glance of ( the Might of ) your Lord , how He lengthens the shadow ( till noon ) ? And had He willed He could certainly have made it stationary . Then We have made the sun a proof of this ( shadow ) .
Then , drawing this ( shadow ) little by little towards Ourselves , We roll it up .
And He is the One Who has made the night a ( wrapper - like ) covering for you and made sleep ( a means of ) rest ( for you ) and the day a time to get up ( for work ) .
And He is the One Who sends the breezes as good news before ( the rain of ) His Mercy . And it is We Who send down pure ( and cleansing ) water from the sky .
So that We may give life with that to ( any ) dead city and ( furthermore ) We provide this ( water ) for drink to many cattle and ( nomadic ) people that We have created .
And surely We keep distributing this ( rain ) among them ( on the scale of different times and cities ) so that they may contemplate . Even then most people did not accept ( anything ) except ingratitude .
And had We willed , We would have sent a Warner in every town .
So , ( O man of faith , ) do not follow the disbelievers and launch a large - scale struggle against them by means of ( logic and preaching of the Quran ) .
And He is the One Who joined two rivers , this ( one ) very sweet and freshening and that ( other one ) very salty and bitter . And He set a barrier and a strong partition between them .
And He is the One Who created man from ( a sperm drop resembling ) water , and made for him ( kinship by ) lineage and in - laws . And your Lord is All - Powerful .
And they ( disbelievers ) worship besides Allah those ( idols ) that can neither bring them any profit nor do them any harm . And the disbeliever is ( always ) a helper ( of Satan ) in ( disobeying ) his Lord .
And We have not sent you but as a Bearer of good news ( for the obedient servants of Allah ) and as a Warner ( to the rebels ) .
Say : I do not ask you for any compensation for this ( preaching ) but that whoever desires to take a path to ( reach ) his Lord ( may step in ) .
And put your trust in the Ever - Living ( Lord ) Who will never die , and glorify Him with His praise , and Sufficient is His awareness of the sins of His servants .
He Who created the heavenly spheres and the earth and this ( universe ) in between them in six periods . Then He settled Himself on the Throne ( befitting His Majesty . He ) is Most Kind . ( O aspirant to His gnosis ! ) Ask of Him someone who has attained to His awareness . ( The unaware do not have any gnosis of Him . )
And when it is said to them : Prostrate yourselves before the Most Kind ( Lord ) , the ( deniers of the Truth ) say : What is the Most Kind Lord ? Shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you command us ? And this ( command ) increased only hatred in them .
Most Blessed and Most Glorified is He Who made vast mansions of heavenly spheres ( in the form of galaxies ) in the heavenly cosmos and made ( the sun ) in it a ( light - generating and heat - emitting ) lamp and a shining moon ( in the solar system ) .
And He is the One Who made the day and the night rotate after each other for him who desires to contemplate or intends to be grateful . ( There is direction and guidance in these creative powers . )
And the ( favourite ) servants of the Most Kind ( Lord ) are those who walk gently on the earth and when the ignorant ( i . e . impolite ) people say to them something ( unlikable ) they ( get aside ) saying : Peace .
And ( these ) are the ones who spend their nights prostrating themselves and standing before their Lord ( cloaked in submissiveness ) .
And ( these ) are the people who pray ( all the time before the Presence of Allah ) : O our Lord , turn away from us the torment of Hell . Surely its torment is most injurious ( and everlasting ) .
Surely that is an evil lodging ( for temporary lodgers ) and an evil abode ( for permanent dwellers ) .
And ( these ) are the people who are neither extravagant nor miserly when they spend . And their spending is ( based on ) a balance between the two extremes ( of extravagance and miserliness ) .
And these are the people who do not worship any other god apart from Allah , nor do they kill the soul whose killing without any just cause Allah has forbidden , and nor do they commit adultery . And whoever does this will receive the punishment due for the sin .
His punishment will be doubled on the Day of Rising and disgraced and humialted he will live in it forever .
But whoever repents and believes and does good deeds , so these are the people whose evil deeds Allah will change into good ones . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And whoever repents and executes good , so he returns to Allah ( the way ) returning is due .
And these are the people who do not attend , ( both verbally and practically , ) the false and untruthful matters , and when they pass by evil activities , they pass on ( observing caution ) with utmost nobility and dignity .
And these are the people who , when they are directed and guided by means of Revelations of their Lord , do not fall at them deaf and blind ( but reflect on them ) .
And these are the people who submit ( before the Presence of Allah ) : O our Lord , grant us coolness of eyes in our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the Godfearing people .
They will be rewarded with lofty palaces ( in Paradise ) as recompense for their patience and steadfastness and will be welcomed therein with greetings and salutations of Peace .
They will live therein forever . Those ( lofty palaces in Paradise ) are the most excellent lodgings and ( decent ) abodes .
Say : My Lord cares little for you if you do not worship ( Him ) . But you have indeed rejected ( Him ) . So now this ( denial ) will ever endure as permanent torment ( for you ) .
Ta , Sin , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are the Verses of the Book that makes clear ( the Truth ) .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) You will perhaps risk your ( dearest ) life ( grieving ) that they do not accept faith .
If We intend , We should send down upon them ( such ) a Sign from heaven as their necks would not but bow down before it .
And there does not come to them any fresh direction and guidance from the Most Kind ( Lord ) but they turn away from it .
Thus they have indeed denied ( the Truth ) , so the news of what they used to make fun of will reach them soon .
And have they not discerned the earth what a variety of excellent vegetation We have caused to grow in it ?
Surely there is a Sign in it ( of Allahs Might ) but most of them are not the ones to believe .
And assuredly your Lord alone is the Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
And ( recall the incident ) when your Lord called to Musa ( Moses ) : Go to the wrongdoing people .
( That is ) the people of Pharaoh . Do they not fear ( Allah ) ?
Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O my Lord , I fear that they will reject me .
And my breast constricts ( under such adverse circumstances ) and my tongue does not express ( fluently ) , so send ( Gabriel with revelation ) to Harun ( Aaron as well so that he becomes my helper ) .
And they also have a charge against me ( of killing a Coptic ) , so I fear they may kill me .
( Allah ) said : By no means , so go both of you with Our Signs . Surely We are with you , hearing ( everything ) .
So go both of you to Pharaoh and say : We are the Messengers ( sent ) by the Lord of all the worlds .
( Our aim is that ) you send the Children of Israel with us ( setting them free ) .
Pharaoh said : Did we not bring you up among us as a child and you spent many years of your life with us ?
And ( then ) you committed that deed which you committed ( i . e . you killed a Coptic ) , and you are one of the ungrateful ( you have forgotten our guardianship and favours ) .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : When I did that deed I was unaware ( that even a single blow would take his life ) .
So ( at that time ) , I went out of your ( line of control ) when I feared your ( designs ) . Then my Lord bestowed on me the Commandment ( of Prophethood ) and ( finally ) made me one of the Messengers .
And is that ( any ) favour of which you are reminding me ? ( That happened also because ) you had enslaved ( all my people ) the Children of Israel .
Pharaoh said : What is the Lord of all the worlds ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : ( He ) is the Lord of all the heavens and the earth and the ( whole universe ) between the two if you are a firm believer .
He said to those seated around him : Are you not listening ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) added : ( The One Who ) is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers ( too ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : Surely your Messenger that has been sent to you is but insane .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : ( He ) is the Lord of the east and the west and ( the whole universe ) between the two if you have ( some ) sense .
( Pharaoh ) said : ( O Musa [ Moses , ] ) if you take a god other than me , I will certainly ( arrest and ) put you among the prisoners .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Even if I bring you something manifest ( also as a miracle ) ?
( Pharaoh ) said : Bring it if you are truthful .
So Musa ( Moses ) put his staff down ( on the ground ) and that at once became a serpent evidently clear .
And ( Musa [ Moses ] ) brought out his hand ( after putting it under his armpit ) and there it became radiant white to the viewers .
( Pharaoh ) said to the chiefs ( sitting ) around him : Undoubtedly he is a ( highly ) learned sorcerer .
He seeks to drive you out of your land by ( the force of ) his magic . So what is your opinion ( about him now ) ?
They said : Put off ( the announcement of sentence for ) him and his brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) and send callers to ( all ) the cities ( to summon the sorcerers ) .
They shall bring to you every high ranking expert sorcerer .
So all the sorcerers were assembled at the appointed time on the fixed day .
And it was said to the people ( by Pharaohs side ) : You will assemble together ( on this occasion ) .
So that we may follow ( Din [ Religion ] of ) the sorcerers if they overmaster ( Musa [ Moses ] and Harun [ Aaron ] ) .
Then when the sorcerers arrived they said to Pharaoh : Is there ( also ) any reward ( fixed ) for us if we gain the upper hand ( in the contest ) ?
( Pharaoh ) said : Yes indeed ! ( Instead of the rewarded ones , ) you will straight away join ( my ) closer circle ( and intimate relationship is far higher in grade than reward ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said to those ( sorcerers ) : Throw down the ( magic ) items which you are about to throw .
So they cast down their strings and sticks and said : By the honour of Pharaoh we shall certainly win .
Then Musa ( Moses ) cast down his staff which , ( changing into a serpent , ) began swallowing up those things which they had made look different ( from reality ) through trickery .
So , all the magicians fell down prostrating themselves .
They said : We believe in the Lord of all the worlds .
The Lord of Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : You have believed in Him before I granted you permission . Surely it is he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) who is your chief ( coach ) and who has taught you magic . You will soon come to know ( your end ) . I will definitely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides and will surely crucify you all .
They said : There is no harm ( in it ) . Surely we are to return to our Lord .
We have strong hope that our Lord will forgive our sins since it is we who are the first to believe ( now ) .
And We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : Take away My servants ( from here ) by night ; you will certainly be chased .
Then Pharaoh sent callers to the cities .
( And conveyed : ) Surely these ( Children of Israel ) are but a small party .
And undoubtedly they are provoking us .
And verily we all are ( also ) alert and vigilant .
Then We drove them ( Pharaohs people ) out of gardens and springs .
And ( also expelled them ) from treasures and refined dwellings .
So ( We did ) and made the Children of Israel inheritors of all ( those bounties ) .
Then at sunrise they ( Pharaohs people ) chased them .
So when the two parties came face to face the companions of Musa ( Moses ) said : ( Now ) we are sure to be caught .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Never ! Surely my Lord is with me . He will show me the way ( to deliverance ) just now .
Then We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : Strike the sea with your staff . So the sea split ( into twelve parts ) and each part became like a huge mountain .
And We brought the other party ( Pharaoh and his companions ) closer to that place .
And We saved Musa ( Moses ) and ( also ) all those who were with him .
Then We drowned the others ( i . e . Pharaoh and his people ) .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) . And most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful indeed .
And also recite to them the story of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
When he said to his father and his people : What do you worship ?
They said : We worship idols and remain stuck to their ( worship and care ) .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Do they hear you when you call ( them ) ?
Or do they bring you any profit or loss ?
They said : ( We do not know that ) but we found our fathers doing the same .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Have you ( ever ) thought ( of their reality ) you worship ?
( Did ) you or ( any of ) your forefathers ( ever realize ) ?
So ( all ) these ( idols ) are enemies to me except the Lord of all the worlds . ( He is the One Who is my God . )
He Who created me and He is the One Who guides me .
And He is the One Who provides me with food and drink .
And when I fall ill , He is the One Who cures me .
He is the One Who will cause me to die and then He alone will give me life ( again ) .
And Who , I hope , will forgive me my misdeeds on the Day of Judgment .
O my Lord ! Bless me with excellence in knowledge and deeds , and include me among those who deserve Your exceptional intimacy .
And ordain for me virtuous remembrance and acceptance among the coming generations ( too ) .
And include me among the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss .
And forgive my father . Surely he was of the misguided .
And disgrace me not on the Day ( when ) people will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
The Day when neither wealth nor sons will profit .
But he alone ( will be the gainer ) who appears before the Presence of Allah with a heart protected ( from ) and pure ( of all evils ) .
And ( on that Day ) Paradise will be brought closer to the Godfearing ( and self - protecting ) .
And Hell will be uncovered before the misguided .
And it will be said to them : Where are those ( idols ) which you used to worship .
Besides Allah ? Can they help you or can they help themselves ( to save themselves from Hell ) ?
So into Hell will be thrown headlong ( the idols as well as ) the people who lost the straight road .
And all the troops of Iblis ( too will be hurled into Hell ) .
Those ( misguided people ) will say while disputing among themselves ( in the Hell ) .
By Allah , we were in manifest error .
When we held you equal to the Lord of all the worlds .
And no other than ( these ) evildoers led us astray .
So we do not have any intercessor ( today ) .
Nor do we have any passionate friend .
Alas ! If once we could have ( a chance to ) return ( to the world ) , we would become believers .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) . And most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
The people of Nuh ( Noah also ) rejected the Messengers .
When their ( kinship ) brother Nuh ( Noah ) said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Indeed I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
So fear Allah and obey me .
They said : Should we believe in you while the people of the lowest and most worthless ( classes of society ) are following you ?
( Nuh [ Noah ] ) said : What has my knowledge to do with their ( professional ) tasks ?
Their account is only with my Lord . If you could but understand ( what the real honour and dishonour is ) !
And I am not the one who casts out the believers .
I am only a clear Warner .
They said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , if you do not stop ( saying these things ) , then surely you will be stoned to death .
( Nuh [ Noah ] ) submitted : O my Lord , my people have rejected me .
So judge between me and them and deliver me and the believers who are in my company .
So We delivered him and those who were ( aboard ) with him in the fully loaded Ark .
Then thereafter We drowned all the rest .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Ad ( too ) rejected the Messengers .
When their ( kinship ) brother Hud said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Do you build a monument on every high point ( merely ) for vanity and vain pursuits ?
And do you erect strongly - built palaces ( having pools ) with the hope of living ( in the world ) forever ?
And when you lay hand on someone you do it like ruthless tyrants .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And fear Him ( Allah ) Who has helped you with the things which you know .
He has helped you with cattle and children .
And ( also ) with gardens and springs .
Surely I fear the torment of a Terrible Day coming upon you .
They said : It is all the same to us whether you admonish or do not become of those who admonish ( we shall not believe ) .
It is nothing ( else ) but the habits ( and customs ) only of the forerunners ( which we cannot abandon ) .
And we will not be afflicted with the torment .
So they rejected him ( Hud ) and We destroyed them . Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Thamud ( also ) rejected the Messengers .
When Salih , their ( kinship ) brother , said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Will you be left in peace and contentment ( forever ) in these ( bounties ) which are ( available to you ) here ?
( Here ) in the gardens and springs ?
And in crops and palm - trees which have soft and fine blossoms ?
And , skilled ( in stone - carving ) , you carve out houses in the mountains .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And do not obey the instructions of those who exceed limits .
Those who spread destructive activities in the land and do not do constructive works ( for society ) .
They said : You are but of the magic - stricken people .
You are but a human being like us , so bring some Sign if you are truthful .
( Salih ) said : ( That Sign ) is this she - camel . A time for water is ( appointed ) for her and on an appointed day is your turn for water .
And do not touch her with evil ( intention ) or the torment of a ( gravely ) terrible Day will seize you .
But they hamstrung her ( and killed her ) . Then they became remorseful ( because of what they did ) .
So the torment seized them . Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Lut ( Lot ) also rejected the Messengers .
When Lut ( Lot ) , their ( kinship ) brother , said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Do you approach only males ( to satisfy your sexual desire ) from among the people of the world .
And you leave your wives your Lord has created for you ? You are rather of those who exceed bounds ( in transgression ) .
They said : O Lut ( Lot ) , if you do not stop ( saying these things ) , you will surely become of the exiled .
( Lut [ Lot ] ) said : No doubt I am of those who are disgusted by your practice .
O Lord ! Deliver me and my family from ( the consequent suffering of ) this practice which they are doing .
So We delivered him and his entire family .
Except for an old woman who was among those who stayed behind .
Then We destroyed the others .
And We rained on them ( stones ) . So how devastating was that rain on the people who were stressed with horror !
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
The dwellers of al - Aika ( i . e . the People of the Wood also ) rejected the Messengers .
When Shuaib said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Always fill up full measure and do not become injurious ( to the rights of the people ) .
And weigh with a straight balance .
And do not give to the people their things ( weighing ) less than what is due , nor provoke strife in the land ( by such moral , economic and social corruption and fraud ) .
And fear Him ( Allah ) Who has created you and the former generations .
They said : ( O Shuaib , ) you are but of the magic - stricken people .
And you are but a human being like us and surely we consider you among the liars .
So , make a piece of heaven fall on us , if you are truthful .
( Shuaib ) said : My Lord knows best these ( frauds ) which you are doing .
So they rejected Shuaib and the torment of the Day of Shadow seized them . No doubt that was the torment of a terrible day .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
And indeed this Quran has been revealed by the Lord of all the worlds .
The Trusted Spirit ( Gabriel ) has descended with it .
Upon your ( most illumined ) heart so that you may be a Warner ( to the disobedient ) .
( It is sent down ) in the plain Arabic language .
And verily it is ( also mentioned ) in the scriptures of former communities .
And is it not for them a ( sufficient ) proof ( of the Truth of the Quran and the Truth of Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) that the learned scholars of the Children of Israel ( also ) recognize it ?
And if We had sent it down to any of the non - Arabs .
And he had recited it to these people , ( even then ) they would not have believed in it .
Thus have We forced its ( denial ) firmly into the hearts of the sinners .
They will not believe in it until they see the painful torment .
So that ( torment ) will come upon them all of a sudden and they will not ( even ) perceive it .
They will then say : Shall we be given respite ?
Do they seek to hasten Our punishment ?
Tell Me , if We provide them benefit for years .
Then comes to them that ( torment ) which they are being promised .
Then what will those resources which they were utilizing do ( to drive that torment away from them ) ?
And We have not destroyed any town except those ( towns ) for which Warners had come .
( And that too ) for direction and guidance . And We were not unjust .
And it is not Satans who descended with this ( Quran ) .
They are neither worthy nor capable ( of it ) .
Surely they have been debarred from hearing ( this Divine Communication ) .
So , ( O My servant , ) do not call upon any other god besides Allah lest you become of those who are punished .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) warn your close relatives ( of Our torment ) .
And extend your ( merciful , kind and supporting ) hand to those believers who follow you .
But , if they disobey you , then say : I am disgusted by these ( evil ) deeds which you are doing .
And put your trust in Almighty , Ever - Merciful ( Lord ) .
Who sees you when you stand up ( for Tahajjud Prayer in the solitary hours at night ) .
And Who ( also keeps ) seeing your turning movements among those who prostrate themselves in Prayer .
Verily He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Shall I tell you upon whom the satans descend ?
They descend on every lying sinner ( who weaves false allegations ) .
Who pour ( into their ears ) hearsay and most of them are liars .
And only the digressers follow the poets .
Have you not seen that these ( poets ) wander distracted ( purposelessly ) in every valley ( of reflections ? They take little serious and true interest in reality . They rather remain happy and lost in verbal leaps and imaginative jumps ) .
And that they say ( such things ) that they do not ( themselves ) do .
Except for those ( poets ) who believe and do pious deeds persistently and remember Allah abundantly ( i . e . they eulogize Allah and the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in their poetry ) , and avenge themselves after they are wronged ( by means of poetic compositions , and defend Islam and the oppressed rather inspire them with zeal through their poetry . This type of poetry is not condemnable . ) And those who do wrong will soon come to know to what place of turning they shall turn back ( after death ) .
Ta , Sin . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the ( Holy ) Quran and an enlightening Book
A guidance and good news for ( those ) believers .
Who establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and it is they who believe in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter , We have made their ( evil ) deeds appear fascinating ( to them ) . So they wander distracted ( in error ) .
It is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and it is they who are ( the greatest ) losers in the Hereafter .
And surely you are being taught ( this ) Quran from All - Wise , All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
( Recall that incident ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his wife : I have seen a fire ( or I have perceived a flash of love and liking in the fire ) . Soon I will bring you some news from it ( for which we have been wandering in deserts and forests since long ) , or I bring ( you also from there ) some burning brand so that you ( too ) may feel the burn ( of its heat ) .
So when he neared it , a call was given : Blessed is He Who is ( luminously unveiling His veil of Light ) in this fire and ( also ) he who is around it ( in the reflection of the theophanies of Allahs Light ) . And Allah is Holy ( and Glorified High above any resemblance and physical manifestation ) , the Lord of all the worlds .
( O Musa [ Moses ] ! ) It is I , Allah ( Unveiling My Light ) , Almighty , All - Wise .
And , ( O Musa [ Moses ] , ) cast your staff ( on the ground ) . So when ( Musa ( Moses ) after casting the staff on the ground ) saw it moving fast as if it were a serpent , he ( reacting naturally ) turned back running and did not ( even ) look back . ( Allah said : ) O Musa ( Moses ) , do not fear . Surely the Messengers do not fear in My Presence .
But whoever wrongs , then after doing evil replaces ( it ) with good , then I am indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And put your hand into the opening of your collar . It will come out ( turned ) radiant white without any ill . ( Both these are ) of the nine Signs ( of Allah ) . Go ( with them ) to Pharaoh and his people . Surely they are disobedient people .
But when Our clear and sight - giving Signs reached them , they said : This is plain magic .
And out of vanity and wickedness , they rejected them straight away while their hearts had accepted these ( Signs as true ) . So see how ( evil ) was the end of the evildoers !
And indeed We bestowed upon Dawud ( David ) and Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] extraordinary knowledge ) and both said : All praise be to Allah Who has exalted us above many of His believing servants .
And Sulaiman ( Solomon ) succeeded Dawud ( David ) and said : O people , we have been taught the speech of birds ( as well ) and we have been granted everything . No doubt , this is most obvious Grace ( of Allah ) .
And armies for Sulaiman ( Solomon ) were collected from among ( all species of ) the jinn , human beings and birds . So they were held on ( in his service ) for discipline and training .
Until when these ( troops ) reached an open field of ants , one ant said : O ants , enter your dwellings , lest Sulaiman ( Solomon ) and his troops crush you while they remain just unaware .
So he ( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) smiled , feeling amused at the ants words , and submitted : O Lord , keep me by Your bestowal firm on it that I remain ever - thankful for Your favour which You have conferred on me and on my parents , and I do such pious deeds as You are pleased with , and admit me by Your mercy among your pious slaves enjoying exceptional nearness to You .
And Sulaiman ( Solomon ) inspected the birds and said : How is it that I do not see the hoopoe ? Or has he ( really ) vanished ?
I will certainly award him severe punishment ( for being absent without leave ) or will certainly slaughter him , or he will bring me a sound plea ( of being not guilty ) .
It was only for a little while that he stayed ( outside ) , then he ( appeared and ) said : I have come to know a thing that is ( perhaps ) not in your knowledge , and I have brought you from ( the land of ) Saba ( Sheba ) a sure and true piece of news .
I have found ( there ) a woman who is ruling over them ( i . e . the citizens of the land of Saba [ Sheba ] ) , and she has been given everything ( of possession and authority ) , and she has a great throne .
I found her and her people prostrating themselves before the sun instead of Allah . And Satan has made their ( evil ) deeds highly fascinating for them and has hindered them from the path ( of the Oneness of Allah ) . So they are not getting guidance .
( They are hindered ) so that they do not fall in prostration before the Presence of Allah , Who brings forth ( i . e . unveils ) the ( realities and forms of matter ) hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows ( all ) those things which you hide and which you disclose .
There is none worthy of worship except Allah . He alone is the Master of the Supreme Throne of Authority .
( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) said : We see right now whether you speak the truth or you are of the liars .
Go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them . Then withdraw from them and see what they turn to .
( The Queen ) said : O chiefs , a noble letter has been delivered to me .
That ( letter ) has indeed ( come ) from Sulaiman ( Solomon ) , and that begins with the Name of Allah , Who is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
( Its contents read : ) Do not ( strive to ) rise above me and come to me in submission .
( The Queen ) said : O courtiers , advise me in this matter . I do not make a final decision on any matter until you come to me and state your opinions ( for or against the matter ) .
They said : We are powerful and great warriors but the command is your prerogative . So consider ( yourself ) what command you should give .
( The Queen ) said : No doubt when kings enter a town , they destroy it and disgrace and humiliate its elite citizens . And these ( people ) too will do the same .
And surely I am sending him some gifts and see what reply the messengers bring back .
So when that ( messenger ) came to Sulaiman ( Solomon he ) said ( to him [ i . e . the messenger ] ) : Do you want to help me with wealth , whereas what Allah has given me is better than this ( wealth ) which He has given you ? It is rather you who take pleasure ( and ) pride in your gifts .
So go back to them ( with your gifts ) . We will come with such troops ( to invade ) them they will not have ( the power ) to fight back , and , humiliating them , we shall drive them out from there in such a plight that they will be dishonoured ( becoming prisoners ) .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : O courtiers , which of you can bring me the throne ( of the Queen ) before they come to me in submission ?
One mighty jinn submitted : I can bring it to you before you rise from your seat . And I am indeed energetic ( enough ) and trustworthy ( to bring it ) .
Then the one who had some knowledge of the ( heavenly ) Book submitted : I can bring it to you before your vision turns back to you ( i . e . even before the twinkling of an eye ) . So , when ( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) saw it ( the throne ) placed before him , he said : This is by the Grace of my Lord so that He may put me to the test whether I thank ( Him ) or not . And he who thanks ( Allah ) his gratitude is for the good of his own self , and he who is ungrateful surely my Lord is Self - Sufficient , Most Generous .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : ( To test the Queen , ) change the display and appearance of her throne . We shall see whether she gets some clue ( to recognize it ) or proves to be of those who do not have quick reflexes .
Then when she ( the Queen ) came she was asked : Is your throne like this ? She said : It looks as if it is the same and we have already known ( the Truth of Sulaimans [ Solomons ] Prophethood ) and we have become Muslims .
And the ( false god ) she worshipped besides Allah prevented her ( the Queen from accepting the Truth before this ) . No doubt she was of a disbelieving people .
It was said to her ( the Queen ) : Enter the compound of the palace ( beneath which were flowing waves of bluish water ) . So when the Queen saw that ( elegant crystal floor ) she thought it was a deep pool . And ( pulling up her skirt ) she uncovered her lower legs . Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : This is the compound of the palace paved with crystal slabs . The Queen submitted : O my Lord , ( I was deluded in like manner . ) Surely I wronged my soul . And now along with Sulaiman ( Solomon ) , I submit to Allah , Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
And surely We sent to the people of Thamud their ( kinship ) brother Salih ( as a Messenger : ) Worship Allah . Then they became two parties disputing with each other .
Salih said : O my people , why do you hasten the evil ( i . e . torment ) before the good ( i . e . mercy ) ? Why do you not ask for forgiveness from Allah so that you are shown mercy ?
They said : You have caused us misfortune and so have your companions . ( Salih ) said : ( The cause of ) your misfortune is ( written ) with Allah ; you people have rather been put to trial .
And there were in the city ( of the people of Thamud ) nine prominent leaders ( leading their respective parties ) who used to spread destructive activities in the land and would not do constructive works .
( These leaders ) said : Vow among yourselves by swearing in the Name of Allah that we will certainly launch a murder attack against Salih and his family at night and will then tell their heirs that we were not present on the occasion of their murder . And surely we are telling the truth .
They worked out a plan in secret and We ( also ) devised a secret scheme ( to foil that ) , and they did not get a hint of it .
See then what was the end of their ( wicked ) plan ! Surely We destroyed those ( leaders ) and their entire people altogether .
So these are their houses lying ruined , for they committed oppression and injustice . No doubt there is a Sign ( of Warning ) in it for those who have knowledge .
And We delivered those who believed and became Godfearing .
And ( recall ) Lut ( Lot ) when he said to his people : Do you commit indecency while you see ( as well ) ?
Do you approach men rather than women to satisfy your sexual desire ? The truth is that you are ignorant people .
The only answer of his people was that they said : Drive out the family of Lut ( Lot ) from your town ; they claim to be very pious .
So We delivered Lut ( Lot ) and his family except his wife , for We destined her to be among those who stayed behind ( for torment ) .
And We heavily rained upon them ( stones ) . So evil was the rain ( of stones ) upon those people who were stressed with horror .
Say : All praise be to Allah and peace be upon His Servants whom He has Chosen ( and Exalted ) . Is Allah better or those ( false gods ) that these people associate ( with Him ) ?
Well , Who has created the heavens and the earth and poured down water for you from the atmosphere in the sky ? Then with that ( water ) We brought forth fresh and beautiful gardens . It was not possible for you to grow plants in these ( gardens ) . Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? In fact , they are the people who are turning away ( from the path of Truth ) .
Or , Who made the earth a dwelling place and made rivers amid it and made for it huge mountains and put a barrier between the two seas ( of salt and sweet waters ) ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? But most of these ( disbelievers ) do not have knowledge .
Or , Who grants the supplication of the anxiety - stricken caller when he calls upon Him and Who removes the trouble and makes you successors and inheritors ( of the predecessors ) in the earth ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? You people accept advice in the least .
Or , Who guides you in the darkness of land and sea and sends winds as good news before ( the rain of ) His Mercy ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? Exalted is Allah High above ( the false gods ) which they associate with Him .
Well , Who originates creation and shall repeat the same ( process of creation ) and Who grants you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? Say : ( O polytheists , ) bring your proof if you are truthful .
Say : Those who are in the heavens and the earth do not have the knowledge of the unseen ( by themselves ) except Allah ( Who is Self - Knowing ) , nor do they know when they will be raised up ( alive again ) .
The truth is that their knowledge about the Hereafter terminated after reaching ( its ) limit but they are just ( caught ) in doubt about it . Nay , they are blind to its ( exact knowledge ) .
And the disbelievers say : When we and our fathers become dust ( after death ) , shall we be brought forth ( from graves alive ) ?
In fact we and , before this , our ancestors ( too ) have been promised this . These are but stories fabricated by the foregoing people .
Say : Travel in the land and see how was the end of the evildoers .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) do not grieve ( over what they say ) , nor ( undergo ) distress at the deceitful and treacherous activities which they are carrying out .
And they say : ( Reply ) when this promise ( of the Last Day ) will come true if you are truthful .
Say : It is not far from possible that a part of that ( torment ) which you seek to hasten has nearly reached you .
And surely your Lord is Gracious to the people but most of them do not give thanks .
And certainly your Lord knows well what their breasts hide and also what they make known .
And there is nothing hidden in the heavens and the earth but is recorded in a Clear Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
Surely this Quran expounds to the Children of Israel most of the things in which they differ .
And verily it is Guidance and Mercy for the believers .
And verily your Lord will judge between these ( believers and disbelievers ) by His Command ( of Justice ) . And He is Almighty , All - Knowing .
So put your trust in Allah . Surely you are ( firm and fixed ) on the Evident Truth .
( O Beloved ! ) Surely you neither make the dead ( i . e . the disbelievers deprived of the vitality of faith ) hear your call nor the deaf ( i . e . deprived of hearing the call of Truth ) while they are getting away ( from you ) turning their backs .
Nor can you guide the blind ( of heart , rescuing them ) from their wrong path . ( In fact ) you make hear only those who ( accepting your call ) believe in Our Revelations . So it is they who are Muslims ( and only they deserve to be called alive ) .
And when the time to execute Our Command ( of torment ) against them comes , We shall bring out for them from the earth a beast who will converse with them because people do not place certitude in Our Signs .
And the Day when We shall gather out of every Umma ( Community ) a party of those who used to reject Our Revelations , they will be stopped ( from the front in order that they all move together ) .
Till when they all reach ( the accountability post ) , it will be said : Did you reject My Revelations ( without meditating on them ) , whereas you could not thoroughly understand them with ( your inadequate ) knowledge ? Or ( tell yourselves ) what else was ( the reason ) that you used to ( belie the Truth ) .
And ( Our ) promise against them has been fulfilled because they continued doing injustice . So they will not be able to say anything ( in reply ) .
Have they not seen that We made the night for them so that they may rest in it and the day sight - giving ( to oversee the affairs of life and to make things visible and perceptible ) . Indeed there are Signs in it for those who believe .
And on the Day when the trumpet is blown , then ( all ) those in the heavens and in the earth will be terrified except those whom Allah pleases ( will not worry ) . And all will appear before His Presence submissively .
And , ( O man , ) you will see the mountains and think them firmly fixed whereas they will be flying like the passing of clouds . ( This ) is the work of Allah , Who has made everything strong and stable ( with Wisdom and Strategy ) . Surely He is Well - Aware of all ( the works ) that you do .
Whoever brings good ( that Day ) , for him ( the reward ) will be better than that and they will be peaceful and secure against terror that Day .
And whoever brings evil shall be thrown prone into the Fire ( of Hell ) . So you will be rewarded only for what you used to do .
( Say to them : ) I have been commanded only to worship the Lord of this city ( Makka ) , Who has made it Holy and Sacred , and everything belongs to Him alone . And I have ( also ) been commanded to be of those who submit wholly ( to Allah ) .
And that I keep reciting the Quran . So whoever accepts Guidance takes the straight path only for his own benefit and ( to him ) who wanders on in error , say : I am only of the Warners .
And say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . Soon He will show you His Signs and you will recognize them . And your Lord is not unaware of what you do .
Ta , Sin , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are the Verses of the enlightening Book .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We recite to you from the true account of Musa ( Moses ) and Pharaoh for those who have believed .
Certainly Pharaoh had become an arrogant rebel ( i . e . a tyrannical despot ) in the land and he had divided the citizens of his ( state ) into ( various ) sects ( and groups ) . He had oppressed and weakened one of these groups ( the population comprising the Children of Israel ) . He used to kill their sons ( to crush their future strength ) and let their women live ( to increase their number without men and spread immorality and indecency among them ) . Surely he was one of those who rouse disruption .
And We wanted to do favour to the people who had been weakened in the land ( through oppression , exploitation and deprivation of rights and freedom ) and make them leaders ( of the oppressed people ) and inheritors ( of the throne of the kingdom ) .
And to give them governance and power in the land and show Pharaoh and Haman and their armies ( the revolution ) that they used to fear .
And We revealed to the heart of the mother of Musa ( Moses ) : Suckle him on , but when you fear ( for his life ) , put him afloat into the river and be not afraid ( of this situation ) nor grieve . Surely We shall bring him back to you and shall make him one of Our Messengers .
Then Pharaohs family picked him up ( from the river ) so that ( by the will of Allah ) he proves for them an enemy and ( a cause of ) grief . Surely Pharaoh , Haman and their armies were the evildoers .
And the wife of Pharaoh said ( on seeing Musa [ Moses ] ) : ( This child ) is coolness of eyes for me and for you ; do not kill him . He may perhaps bring us benefit or we may adopt him as a son . And they were unaware ( of the outcome of this plan ) .
And the heart of Musas ( Mosess ) mother felt empty ( of patience ) . And she would have nearly disclosed the secret ( owing to her impatience ) , had We not energized her heart with the strength of peace and patience , so that she might remain one of the firm believers ( in Allahs promise ) .
And ( Musas [ Mosess ] mother ) said to his sister : Follow him ( to be aware of him ) . So she watched him from a distance but they were ( completely ) unaware .
And We had in advance prohibited him from the feed of wet nurses . So ( Musas [ Mosess ] sister ) said : Shall I tell you about a family who will bring up this ( child ) for you and will ( also ) be his well - wisher ?
So ( this way ) We returned Musa ( Moses ) to his mother so that her eyes might keep cool and so that she might not feel grieved and in order that she might know ( with certitude ) that Allahs promise is true but most of the people do not know .
And when Musa ( Moses ) reached his maturity and ( the age of ) moderation and stability , We honoured him with the Command ( of Prophethood ) and knowledge and wisdom . And that is how We reward the righteous .
And Musa ( Moses ) entered the city ( in Egypt ) at a time when its people were lying ( asleep ) unaware . There he found two men fighting with each other , one from his ( own ) party ( the Children of Israel ) and the other from his enemies ( the people of Pharaoh ) . The man from his own party asked him for help against the other who was from his enemies . So Musa ( Moses ) struck him with his fist and killed him . ( Then ) he said : This is Satans work ( which I have committed ) ; no doubt he is an open misleading enemy .
( Musa - Moses ) submitted : O my Lord , no doubt I have wronged my soul ; so bless me with forgiveness . Then He forgave him . Surely He is the Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( Moreover ) he submitted : O my Lord , because of Your favour ( of forgiveness ) You have blessed me with , I shall never be a helper of the wrongdoers .
So Musa ( Moses ) , anxious and afraid , kept waiting till morning ( to discover what would happen next ) . Then suddenly the man who sought his help the day before was crying out to him for help ( again ) . Musa ( Moses ) said to him : Surely you are the one who has truly lost the right path .
Then , when Musa ( Moses ) decided to catch hold of the person who was an enemy to both of them , he exclaimed : O Musa ( Moses ) , do you want to kill me ( too ) as you killed a man the day before ? You intend only to become a tyrant in the land and you do not desire to become one of the reformers .
And a man came running from the far end of the city and said : O Musa ( Moses ) , the chiefs ( of the people of Pharaoh ) are counselling about you to kill you , so depart ( from here ) . Surely I am of your well - wishers .
So Musa ( Moses ) , afraid and waiting for ( Allahs help ) , went off from there . He prayed : O my Lord , deliver me from the oppressing people .
And when he moved towards Madyan , he said : I hope my Lord will show me the straight path ( to take me to the desired destination ) .
And when he arrived at the watering ( well ) of Madyan , he found there a crowd of people watering ( their flocks ) . And on a side he saw two women , withdrawn , holding back ( their goats . Musa [ Moses ] ) asked : Why are you ( standing ) in this condition ? Both said : We cannot water ( our goats ) till the shepherds take back their flocks and our father is an aged man .
So he watered their ( flocks ) and then turned back to the shade and submitted : O Lord , I am in need of whatever good You may send down to me .
Then ( after a while ) one of those two ( girls ) came to him walking modestly . She said : My father invites you so that he may reward you for ( your labour in ) watering ( the flocks ) for us . So when Musa ( Moses ) came to ( Shuaib , the father of those girls , ) and narrated to him ( the preceding ) incidents , he said : Do not fear . You are safe and secure from the oppressive people .
One of those ( girls ) said : O ( my ) respectable father , take him ( into your service ) . Surely the best person you can employ is the one who is strong and trustworthy ( and he is worthy of this assignment ) .
He said ( to Musa - Moses ) : I intend to marry to you one of my two daughters by ( the dower ) that you serve me on hire for eight years but if you complete ten ( years ) , it will be ( a favour ) from you . And I do not want to make it hard for you . If Allah wills you will find me of the pious .
Musa ( Moses ) said : This ( agreement ) is ( settled ) between me and you . Whichever of the two terms I complete , I will not be forced . And Allah is the Custodian over what we say .
So when Musa ( Moses ) completed the appointed term and set out with his wife , he saw a fire in the direction of Tur . ( That was a flash of Absolute Beauty which caught his heart and fascinated him . ) He said to his wife : Stay ( here ) . I have seen a fire . I may bring you some news ( about Him ) from that ( fire in Whose pursuit I have long been wandering ) , or ( I may bring you ) some burning brand from the ( febrile ) fire so that you ( too ) may feel the burn .
When Musa ( Moses ) reached there , a call was made from the right of ( the blessed Tur ) valley from a tree ( located ) in a blessed spot : O Musa ( Moses ) , verily I am Allah , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
And throw your stick ( on the ground ) . So when Musa ( Moses ) saw it moving fast coiling and curling as if it was a snake , he turned his back , jogged off and did not look behind . ( The Voice said : ) O Musa ( Moses ) , come forth and do not fear . Surely you are of the secure .
Put your hand inside your collar opening . It will come out shining white without any disease . And flex your hand close to your ( breast to remove ) fear . These two Signs from your Lord are for ( sending to ) Pharaoh and his courtiers ( to observe ) . Surely they are disobedient people .
Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O Lord , I killed one of them , so I fear they will kill me .
And my brother Harun ( Aaron ) is more communicative and eloquent in speech than I , so send him with me as a helper that he may bear me out . And I ( also ) fear that they will reject me .
( Allah ) said : We shall strengthen your arm with your brother and shall create for both of you dread and dominance ( in the hearts of the people and in the impact of your endeavours ) . So they will not be able to reach you ( to do harm ) because of Our Signs . You two and your followers will triumph and prevail .
So when Musa ( Moses ) came to them with Our clear and enlightening Signs they said : This is nothing but invented magic ; we ( never ) heard of these things among our ancestors .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : My Lord knows best the one who has brought Guidance from Him and ( also ) the one for whom the House of the Hereafter will be the ( best ) end . Surely the wrongdoers will not prosper .
And Pharaoh said : O courtiers , I do not know any god other than me for you . O Haman ! Kindle a fire on clay ( to bake bricks ) for me ; then build me a high tower ( with them . Climbing it , ) I may perhaps have an access to the Lord of Musa ( Moses ) . And I regard him as one of the liars .
And he ( Pharaoh ) himself and his warriors were unjust in the land doing arrogance and defiance and thought they would not be brought back to Us .
So We seized him and his forces ( in the torment ) and threw them into the sea . Observe then how ( terrible ) was the end of the tyrants !
And We made them the leaders ( of the inmates of Hell ) , for they used to invite ( people ) towards Hell . And they will not be given any help on the Day of Resurrection .
And We made a curse to chase them in this world , and on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) they will be ( counted ) among the miserable .
And surely after ( this scenario that ) We had destroyed the former ( defiant ) communities , We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book which was ( a rich source of ) vision , guidance and mercy for the people so that they might take advice .
And you were not ( present at that time ) on the western side ( of Tur ) when We sent the Command ( of Prophethood ) towards Musa ( Moses ) , nor were you among ( those seventy people who were ) witnesses ( to the Revelation to Musa [ Moses ] . So what else is this narration except the news of the Unseen ? )
But We raised many generations ( successively after Musa [ Moses ] ) and long ages passed over them . Nor were you living among the people of Madyan ( like Musa - Moses and Shuaib ) reciting Our Verses to them . But it is for Us to send ( you exalting with tidings of the Unseen ) .
And nor were you ( present at that time ) on the side of Tur when We called out Musa ( Moses ) . But ( enlightening you on all these matters of the Unseen ) is an ( exceptional ) Mercy from your Lord so that ( having awareness of these incidents ) you may warn these people ( of the torment of Allah ) to whom no Warner has come before you , in order that they may accept admonition .
And ( We would not send any Messenger ) if this was not the case that when some suffering should seize them due to their own evil deeds which they did , they would say : O our Lord , why did You not send us any Messenger so that we might follow Your Revelations and become of the believers ?
Then when the Truth came to them from Our Presence , they said : Why has this ( Messenger ) not been given the ( Signs ) like those ( Signs ) which were given to Musa ( Moses ) ? Did they not deny those ( Signs ) which were given to Musa ( Moses ) before this ? They said : Both ( the Quran as well as the Torah ) are magic ( which ) confirm and agree with each other . And they said : We deny all ( of them ) .
Say : Bring some ( other ) book from Allah which guides better than these two , ( then ) I shall follow that if you are truthful ( in your blames ) .
But if they do not accept what you say then know that ( they do not have any logic ) ; they merely follow their lusts . And who can be more astray than the one who follows his desire abandoning the Guidance from Allah ? Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
In fact We kept sending for them successive commands ( of the Quran ) so that they might take direction and guidance .
Those whom We gave the Book before this they believe in this ( Quran as well in the continuation of the same guidance ) .
And when ( the Quran ) is recited to them , they say : We believe in it ; verily , it is the Truth from our Lord . In fact We had become Muslims ( i . e . the yielding ) even before this .
It is these people who will be given their reward twice because they remained steadfast and fend off evil with good and they spend in Our Way out of the Bounty We bestowed upon them .
And when they hear anything absurd they turn away from it and say : For us are our deeds and for you are your deeds . Peace be upon you . We do not want ( to adopt the mentality and conduct of ) the ignorant . ( Why should we give up our good for the sake of their evil ? )
The truth is that whoever you like ( to bring on to the path of guidance ) you do not yourself bring him on to the path of guidance . Instead , ( it so happens that ) whoever Allah pleases He makes him tread the path of guidance ( through your mediation ) . And He knows best those who find the path of guidance .
And ( the ignorant of its value ) say : If we follow the guidance in your company , we will be snatched out of our land . Have We not made them settle in ( this ) secure and peaceful Sanctuary ( Makka - your own land ) where all kinds of fruits are supplied ( from all over the world ) as sustenance from Us ? But most of them do not know ( for whose sake this whole process operates ) .
And how many towns have We destroyed that became arrogant and ungrateful on account of their prosperous economies ! So here are their ( ruined ) houses that have been inhabited after them but little . And We alone are the inheritors and owners ( in the end ) .
And your Lord does not destroy the towns until He sends to their capital city a Messenger who recites to them Our Verses . And We do not destroy towns unless their dwellers are given to oppression .
And whatever you have been given are but provisions of the worldly life , its charms and beauty . But what is ( yet ) with Allah is far better ( than this ) and eternal . Do you not understand ( this fact ) ?
Can he to whom We have made an excellent promise ( pertaining to Hereafter ) and who becomes one to attain to it be like the ( ill - fated ) one We have given the good things of worldly life then ( owing to ingratitude for the bounties ) becomes of those who will be brought forth on the Last Day ( for punishment ) ?
And the Day when ( Allah ) will call them and say : Where are those that you regarded as My partners and considered them ( gods ) ?
The people against whom the Command ( of torment ) has been proved will say : O our Lord , it is these people who we misguided . We led them astray ( the same way ) as we ( ourselves ) lost the right path . We turn to You showing our disgust towards them and ( in fact ) they did not worship us . ( They rather worshipped their lusts . )
And it will be said ( to them ) : Call your ( self - made ) partners . So they will call them but they ( partners ) will not respond to them and those people will see the torment . Would that they had taken guidance ( in the world ) !
And the Day when ( Allah ) will call to them He will say : What answer did you serve to the Messengers ?
On that Day all information will become unknown to them and they will not be able to ask ( even ) one another .
But whoever repents and believes and does pious deeds will surely be of those who are successful .
And your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses ( whom He pleases for Prophethood and for the right of intercession ) . These ( disbelievers and polytheists ) have no authority or choice ( in this matter ) . Holy is Allah the Glorious and Exalted far above ( the false gods ) that they associate as partners ( with Allah ) !
And your Lord knows ( all ) what their breasts hide ( inside ) and what they make known .
And He alone is Allah ; apart from Him there is no God . All praise belongs to Him in the world and in the Hereafter . And His alone is the ( true ) Command and Rule and to Him alone will you be returned .
Say : Just answer : If Allah prolongs the night over you till the Day of Resurrection ( then ) what god is there besides Allah who will bring you light ? Do you not hear ( these words ) ?
Say : Just tell me this ( as well ) : If Allah prolongs the day over you till the Day of Judgment , ( then ) what god is there besides Allah who will bring you night in which you may take rest ? Do you not see ?
And it is out of His Mercy that He has made night and day for you so that at night you may take rest and ( during the day ) you may seek His Bounty ( sustenance ) and so that you may become grateful .
And the Day when He will call to them and say : Where are they who you regarded as My partners and considered ( gods ) ?
And We shall take out from every Umma ( Community ) a witness and We shall then say ( to the disbelievers ) : Bring your proof . Then they will know that the Truth belongs to Allah and all ( the lies ) they used to invent will disappear from them .
No doubt Qarun ( Korah ) was of the people of Musa ( Moses ) but he oppressed them . And We gave him so much of treasures that it was hard for a powerful party of strong men to ( carry ) his keys while his people said to him : Do not be arrogant and conceited ( out of rejoicing ) . Verily Allah does not like those who gloat .
And seek the home of the Hereafter with what ( wealth ) Allah has given you and ( also ) do not forget your share of the world . And do ( such ) good ( to the people ) as Allah has done good to you . But do not look for ( ways to spread ) evil and terror in the land ( through oppression , accumulation of wealth and exploitation ) . Surely Allah does not like those who violate peace .
He said : ( Why should I spend this capital for the good of people and society ? ) This wealth has been given to me only on the basis of ( the professional ) knowledge and skill I possess . Did he not know that Allah had really destroyed before him many communities who were far stronger than him in might and far ahead in accumulating ( wealth and manpower ) ? And the culprits will not be asked ( for fact - finding or any excuse or reason ) about their sins ( at the time of destruction ) .
Then he went forth before his people ( fully ) adorned and ornamented . ( Seeing his apparent pomp and show ) those who were desirous of worldly life could not help saying : Would that there were such ( affluence and riches ) for us ( as well ) as Qarun ( Korah ) has been given ! Surely he has mighty fortune .
And ( on the other side ) those who had been granted knowledge ( of the Truth ) said : Woe to you ! Allahs reward is ( far ) better ( than this wealth and adornment ) for him who has believed and is committed to pious deeds . But this ( reward and compensation ) will not be given except to those who keep patience .
Then We sank him ( Qarun [ Korah ] ) and his house into the earth . So except Allah there was no ( such ) party that could help him ( in saving from the torment ) . Nor could he stop the torment himself .
And those who were longing for his position and prominence the day before said ( feeling sorry and regretful ) : How amazing ! Allah gives abundantly to whom He wills and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) of His servants . Had not Allah done favour to us , He would have sunk us ( too ) . Ah ! ( It is now understood ) that the disbelievers cannot attain to deliverance .
( This ) is the Home of the Hereafter We have made for such people that neither seek violence and vanity nor mischief in the land . And good end is for the God - fearing .
Whoever brings good , for him is reward better than that and whoever brings evil , then there is no compensation for the evildoers but equal to what they used to do .
Surely the ( Lord ) Who has enjoined ( the teaching , preaching and establishment of the system given in ) the Quran upon you , He will bring you back ( according to your desire ) to the place of return ( Makka or the Hereafter with victory and success ) . Say : My Lord knows best the one who brought Guidance and ( also ) the one who is in open error .
( The Muslim Umma [ Community ] is addressed through the Prophet , blessings and peace be upon him : ) And you did not expect that this ( Book ) shall be revealed to you , but it is ( revealed by ) the Mercy of your Lord . So never be a helper of the disbelievers .
And never let these ( disbelievers ) turn you away from ( implementing and preaching of ) the Revelations of Allah after they have been sent down to you . And keep calling ( the people ) towards your Lord , and never become of those who associate partners with Allah .
And never call any other ( self - made ) god besides Allah . None has the right to be worshipped except He . Everything has to perish but He . His is the Command and to Him you ( all ) will be returned .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
Do people think that they will be released ( just ) on saying : We have believed , and they will not be tried ?
And surely We tried ( also ) those who were before them . Certainly Allah shall make them prominent ( through trial ) who are truthful ( in claiming belief ) , and shall make known the liars ( as well ) .
Do the evildoers think that they will slip away from Our ( grip ) ? How evil is what they decide ( in their minds ) !
Whoever hopes for meeting with Allah , then Allahs appointed time is bound to come . And He alone is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Whoever strives hard ( for the cause of Truth ) strives for his own ( benefit ) . Surely Allah is independent of ( the obedience , submission , toils and struggles ) of all the worlds .
And those who believe and do pious deeds , We shall remove all their misdeeds from their ( record ) and shall certainly give them reward better than the deeds which they will have ( actually ) accomplished .
And We have enjoined upon man to behave benevolently with his parents . And if they struggle with you to make you associate with Me what you have no knowledge of , then do not obey them . To Me you ( all ) have to return . So I shall inform you of ( the deeds ) which you used to do ( in the world ) .
And those who believe and do pious deeds then We shall certainly admit them to the ( group ) of the most pious .
And there are ( also ) those among the people who ( verbally ) say : We believe in Allah , but when they are put to ( some ) trouble in the way of Allah , they consider the trial of the people not unlike punishment from Allah . And if some help comes from your Lord , then indeed they start saying : We were with you . Is Allah not best aware of those ( things ) which are ( hidden ) in the breasts of all the people of the world ?
And surely Allah will distinguish those who have believed ( with true hearts ) and will certainly expose the hypocrites ( too ) .
And the disbelievers say to the believers : Follow our way and we shall bear ( the burden of ) your sins , whereas they will not bear any ( burden ) of their sins . Surely they are liars .
They will certainly carry their own burdens ( of sins ) and ( will also have loaded ) many ( other ) burdens ( over themselves ) along with their own burdens . And they will certainly be interrogated on the Day of Resurrection about those ( false allegations ) which they used to invent .
And indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . He lived among them for a millennium less fifty years . Then the Great Flood ( Deluge ) seized them while they were wrongdoers .
Then We delivered Nuh ( Noah ) and those ( with him ) in the Ark , and made that ( Ark and the incident ) a Sign for the people of the world .
And ( remember ) Ibrahim ( Abraham ) when he said to his people : Worship Allah and fear Him . That is better for you if you know ( the reality ) .
You worship idols besides Allah and fabricate mere lies . Surely those you worship instead of Allah are not masters of your sustenance . So always seek sustenance from Allah , and worship Him alone , and submit thanks to Him . You will be returned to Him alone .
And if you reject ( my words ) then no doubt many generations have rejected ( the Truth ) before as well . And nothing is ( obligatory ) upon the Messenger but to convey ( the Commandments ) in a clear way .
Have they not seen ( i . e . pondered ) how Allah originates creation , then repeats it ( the same way ) ? Surely this ( work ) is easy for Allah .
Say : Travel in the land ( to study life in the universe ) , then observe ( i . e . meditate and research ) as to how He initiated ( life of ) Creation and how He raises and nourishes second life ( passing it through evolutionary stages ) . Surely Allah has Perfect Power over all things .
He torments whom He wills and shows Mercy to whom He pleases . And to Him will you be returned .
And you can escape ( from Allah ) neither in the earth nor in the heavens , and nor is there for you any guardian or helper except Allah .
And those who reject Allahs Revelations and deny meeting with Him , they despair of My Mercy . And it is they for whom there is painful punishment .
So the People of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) had no answer except that they said : Kill him or burn him . Then Allah delivered him from the fire ( of Nimrod ) . Surely there are Signs in this incident for those who have believed .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : You have taken up the worship of idols leaving Allah merely for the sake of mutual friendship in the life of this world . Then on the Day of Resurrection ( each ) one of you will deny ( the friendship of ) the other and ( each ) one of you will curse the other . Hell is your abode and there will be no helper for you .
Then Lut ( Lot ) believed in him ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) and he said : I am migrating towards my Lord . Surely He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And We blessed him with Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( [ Jacob ] a son and a grandson ) and We ordained Prophethood and the Book in Ibrahims descendants . And We gave him his reward ( here ) in this world and surely he is among the most pious in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
And ( remember ) Lut ( Lot ) when he said to his people : Surely you commit the worst indecency . None of the nations in the whole world has ever committed this ( indecency ) before you .
Do you approach men ( for your sexual desire ) and commit highway robberies and do indecent deeds in your ( crowded ) meetings ? And his people ( also ) had no answer except that they said : Bring upon us Allahs torment if you are truthful .
Lut ( Lot ) submitted : O Lord ! Help me against the mischief mongers .
And when Our messengers ( angels ) came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) with good news ( then , adding ) they ( also ) said : We are going to destroy the dwellers of this town because its inhabitants are the wrongdoers .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Lut ( Lot ) is ( also ) here in this ( town ) . They said : We know very well the people who ( live ) in it . We shall certainly save Lut ( Lot ) and his family except his wife . She is of those who remain behind .
And when Our messengers ( angels ) came to Lut ( Lot ) , he felt distressed ( on their arrival ) and felt depressed for their ( intention to torment ) . And ( the messengers ) said : Do not feel afraid or grieved . We shall no doubt save you and your family except your wife . She is of those who will remain behind ( for torment ) .
Surely we are about to bring down from the heaven torment for the inhabitants of this town because they used to disobey .
And verily We sustained ( the ruined houses ) of this town as a clear Sign for the wise .
And ( We sent ) to Madyan their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . So he said : O my people , worship Allah and look forward to the Last Day and do not do mischief in the land .
Then they rejected Shuaib . So ( the torment of ) earthquake seized them ( as well ) and at dawn they were lying prone in their houses ( dead ) .
And ( We destroyed ) Ad and Thamud ( as well ) . And indeed ( ruins of ) some of their houses stand out ( have lived to tell the tale ) for you ( as a lesson of warning ) . And Satan made their evil deeds look charming to them and turned them away from the path ( of Truth ) though they were vigilant and wise .
And ( We also destroyed ) Qarun ( Korah ) , Pharaoh and Haman . And surely Musa ( Moses ) brought to them clear Signs and they were arrogant and violent in the land but could not escape ( Our seizure ) .
So We seized ( everyone of ) them for his sin . And there was ( a faction ) of those against whom We sent a storm of pelting stones . And of them was ( also a group ) whom a roaring blast seized . And ( a party ) of them were such whom We sank into the earth . And of them there was ( yet another community ) that We drowned . And Allah would never have wronged them , but they themselves wronged their own souls .
The example of those ( disbelievers ) who have taken others ( i . e . idols ) as guardians instead of Allah is like the story of a spider who builds ( for herself ) a house ( of cobweb ) . And no doubt the weakest of all houses is the spiders house . Would that they knew it !
Surely Allah knows ( the truth of the idols ) that they worship instead of Him and He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
And these are the examples which We explain for the people ( to understand ) , and none understands them except those who have knowledge .
Allah has created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy . Surely there is in this ( Creation ) a Sign ( of His Oneness and Might ) for those who believe .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Recite that Book which has been revealed to you and establish Prayer . Surely Prayer prohibits indecency and impiety ; and verily the remembrance of Allah is the greatest . And Allah knows whatever ( deeds ) you do .
And , ( O Believers , ) do not argue with the People of the Book but in a suitable and decent way , except those of them who did injustice . And say ( to them ) : We believe in that ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and which was sent down to you and our God and your God is but One and we obey Him alone .
And in like manner We revealed the Book to you . And those ( gnostics of the Truth ) whom We had given the Book ( already ) believe in this ( Book ) . And of these ( inhabitants of Makka too ) there are those who believe in it . And none but the disbelievers deny Our Revelations .
And , ( O Beloved , ) you never recited any book before this , nor did you write it with your own hand in which case the disbelievers would certainly have doubted .
But these are the clear verses ( of the Quran ) that are ( preserved ) in the breasts of those who have been given ( true ) knowledge . And none other than the unjust deny Our Revelations .
And the disbelievers say : Why have Signs not been sent down on him ( the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : The Signs are with Allah alone and I am simply an open Warner .
Is this ( Sign ) not enough for them that We have revealed to you ( that ) Book which is recited to them ( or will always be recited ) ? Surely in this ( Book ) there is mercy and direction and guidance for the believers .
Say : Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between me and you . He knows ( the state of ) all that is in the heavens and in the earth . And those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in Allah , it is they who are the losers .
And they want you to hasten the torment . And had the time ( of the torment ) not been fixed , the torment would have overtaken them . And that ( torment , or the time of the torment , ) shall certainly come upon them all of a sudden and they will not be aware ( of it ) .
They seek the torment from you in haste and surely Hell is about to besiege the disbelievers .
The Day when the torment wraps them from above them and from beneath their feet Allah will say : Savour the taste of works you used to perform .
O My servants who have believed ! Surely My earth is vast , so worship Me alone .
Every soul is to taste death and then to Us you shall be returned .
And those who believe and persevere with right actions We shall certainly house them in the upper palaces of Paradise with streams flowing beneath them ; they will live there forever . What an excellent reward for those who do ( constructive ) works !
( These are the people ) who remain steadfast and always trust their Lord alone .
And many an animal there is that does not carry its sustenance ( with it ) ! Allah provides for them and for you too . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if you ask these ( disbelievers ) : Who created the heavens and the earth and made the sun and the moon law - abiding ? they shall certainly say : Allah . Then where are they turning away ?
Allah increases sustenance for whom He pleases of His servants and restrains for whom He wills . Surely Allah knows everything full well .
And if you ask them : Who sends down water from the sky , then gives life ( and freshness ) to the earth after its death ? they will surely say : Allah . Say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not have sense .
And , ( O people , ) the life of this world is nothing but sport and pastime and the Home of the Hereafter is the only ( true ) life . Would that they knew ( this secret ) !
When they board a vessel they ( abandon the idols in hard time and ) call upon Allah alone , making their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely ( and purely ) for Him . Then , when Allah rescues and brings them safe to the land , they start setting up partners with Him ( again ) .
So that they may show ingratitude towards that ( favour of deliverance ) which We granted them and enjoy ( the unlawful ) benefits ( of the life of disbelief ) . But soon they shall know ( their fate ) .
And have they not seen that We have made the Sanctuary ( of the Kaba ) a safe haven while people are abducted from all around them ? Do they ( still ) believe in falsehood and will they continue disregarding the favour of Allah ?
And who can be more unjust than someone who fabricates a lie concerning Allah or belies the Truth when it comes to him ? Is there not an apartment in Hell ( appointed ) for the disbelievers ?
And those who toil hard ( and fight the lower self vehemently ) for Our cause We certainly guide them in Our Ways ( of striving for and attaining to the gnosis sayr and wusul ) , and verily Allah blesses the men of spiritual excellence with His companionship .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The Romans have been overpowered ( by Persia ) .
In the land nearby . And after their defeat they will soon gain victory .
In a few years ( i . e . in less than a decade ) . The Command is but Allahs both before ( in the Persian dominance ) and afterwards too ( in the Roman dominance ) . And the believers will rejoice on that day .
With the help of Allah . He helps whom He wills and He is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( This ) is the Promise of Allah . Allah does not go against His promise but most people do not know .
They know only the visible worldly life and they are neglectful and unaware of ( the real life of ) the Hereafter .
Have they not meditated within themselves that Allah has not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two except with ( a system of ) Truth and for ( a span of ) fixed term ? And surely most of the people do not believe in the meeting with their Lord .
Have they not travelled in the earth and seen what was the end of those before them ? They were more powerful than them . And they cultivated the earth and inhabited it far more than these people have done . Then their Messengers came to them with clear Signs . So Allah would not wrong them but they wronged their souls themselves .
Then much evil came to be the end of those who did evil because they used to belie the Revelations of Allah and used to ridicule them .
Allah generates creation the first time , then ( He is the One Who ) will create it the second time , then to Him you will be returned .
And the Day when the Last Hour is established , the evildoers will lose hope .
And none of their ( self - made ) partners will intercede for them , and ( ultimately ) they will deny their very same partners .
And the Day when the Last Hour will be established , people will separate from one another ( in personal agony ) .
So those who believe and always do pious deeds will be pleased and delighted in the Gardens of Paradise .
And those who disbelieve and belie Our Revelations and the Meeting of the Last Day , it is they who will be brought forth to the torment .
So glorify Allah when you enter the evening ( Maghrib and Isha times ) and when you enter the morning ( Fajr time ) .
And all praise in the heavens and the earth be to Him alone and ( glorify Him ) in the afternoon ( Asr time ) and at noon ( Zuhr time ) as well .
He is the One Who brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living and enlivens and freshens the earth after its death and you ( too ) will be brought forth ( from the graves ) the same way .
And of His Signs is that He created you from dust , then now you are human beings spread around ( all over the globe ) .
And ( also ) of His Signs is that He created for you mates of your own kind so that you acquire peace from them , and He created between you love and mercy . Verily in this ( system of creation ) there are Signs for those who meditate .
And of His Signs ( too ) is the creation of the heavens and the earth and ( also ) the diversity of your tongues and colours . Verily in that are Signs for the men of knowledge ( and research ) .
And ( also ) of His Signs is your sleep by night and by day and your looking for His Bounty ( sustenance ) . Verily there are Signs in it for the ( active ) listeners .
And among His Signs ( as well ) is that He shows you lightning to make you fear and hope and pours ( rain ) water from the sky . Then with that He brings the earth back to life and liveliness after it dies . Verily there are Signs in it for those who put their mind to work .
And ( also ) of His Signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by His ( system of ) Command . Then when He will give you one call to come ( forth ) from the earth , at once you will come ( forth ) .
And whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone . All are obedient and submissive to Him alone .
And He is the One Who originates creation , then will regenerate it and this ( recreation ) is very easy for Him . His is the highest Glory in the heavens and the earth and He is Almighty , Most Wise .
( To bring home the point of the Oneness of God ) He has illustrated an example for you from your personal lives : Are those ( slaves / slave girls ) , whom you possess , your partners in the wealth which We have given you , that you ( all ) become equal sharers ( owners ? Moreover , do ) you fear them as you fear one another ? ( No , ) We explain the Signs expressly in the same way for those who possess wisdom ( that there is no partner of Allah also in His Creation ) .
But those who have done injustice follow the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves without any knowledge ( and guidance ) . So who can guide him whom Allah has held astray ? And there are no helpers for them .
So set your face with absolute concentration ( and single - minded devotion ) to the obedience of Allah . The nature ( made ) by Allah is ( Islam ) on which He has created mankind ; ( Adopt it . The instinct ) created by Allah will never be changed . This Din ( Religion ) is straight but most people do not know ( these realities ) .
Have your mind set in turning towards Him alone in repentance and remorse and fear Him and establish Prayer and be not of the polytheists .
( Be not also ) of those ( Jews and Christians ) who disintegrated their religion and became sects and subsectsevery sect rejoices over what is with them .
And when suffering afflicts people they call upon their Lord turning towards Him , but when He delights them with the taste of Mercy from Him then some of them straight away start setting up partners with their Lord .
To show ingratitude for the Bounty which We have given them . So enjoy benefits ( of a few days life ) , then soon you will know ( your end ) .
Have We sent down to them any ( such ) authority that speaks as a witness in favour of these idols they associate as partners with Allah ?
And when We delight people with the taste of Mercy they cheer up with that , and when some suffering touches them due to the sins they have already perpetrated they lose hope at once .
Have they not seen that Allah releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains it ( for whom He likes ) ? Surely there are Signs in it for those who believe .
So keep giving to the close relative his due and to the needy and the wayfarers ( their due ) . That is best for those who seek the pleasure of Allah and it is they who will achieve the goal .
And the money that you lend at usury so that ( your wealth ) may increase through mingling with other peoples money will not increase with Allah , but the money that you give as Zakat ( [ the obligatory Alms - due ] and charity donations ) , seeking ( solely ) Allahs pleasureso it is they who multiply ( their money with Allah ) manifold .
Allah is the One Who created you , then granted you sustenance , then causes you to die and then will bring you back to life . Is there any of your ( self - made ) partners who may do any of these ( works ) ? Holy is He ( Allah ) the Glorious , the Transcendent , far above these things which they associate as partners ( with Him ) .
Corruption and disorder has spread over land and sea on account of ( the sins ) which people have earned with their hands so that Allah may make them taste the outcome of some of their ( evil ) deeds that they have committed in order that they may desist .
Say : Travel in the land then see how ( alarming ) was the end of the people before you . Most of them were polytheists .
So set your ( radiant ) face to the straight Din ( Religion ) before that Day comes from Allah which will not avert ( at all ) . On that Day people will separate from one another .
Whoever disbelieves will himself face the ( evil consequences ) of disbelief , while those who act piously are setting aright for themselves the places of rest ( in Paradise ) .
So that Allah rewards out of His Bounty those who believe and do good deeds . Surely He does not take the disbelievers for friends .
And ( also ) of His Signs it is that He sends winds that bring glad tidings ( of rain ) , so that He may bless you with His Mercy ( in the shape of the results of rain ) and that the ships may ( also ) sail with His Command ( by means of these winds ) . And ( all this ) is because you may seek His bounty ( in the form of agriculture and business ) and you may ( thus ) become thankful .
And in fact We sent before you Prophets to their respective peoples and they came to them with clear Signs . Then We took revenge on the wicked ( who belied and disbelieved ) , and to help the believers was ( and is ) a binding obligation upon Our Grace .
Allah is the One Who sends the winds and they raise the clouds . Then He spreads this ( cloud ) in the atmosphere in the sky as He likes . Then He breaks it up into ( various ) pieces ( layer upon layer ) . Then you see the rain pouring down from its midst . Then , when He sends it to those of His servants whom He pleases , they become instantly cheerful .
Although they were in despair before the rainfall upon them .
So see the effects of Allahs Mercy how He gives life to the earth after its death . Surely He will bring the dead ( also ) back to life ( in the same way ) and He is All - Powerful over everything .
And if We send a dry wind and they see ( their ) crops turning yellow , then after this they will start denying ( all the earlier favours ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Surely you neither make the dead ( i . e . the disbelievers deprived of the vitality of faith ) hear your call nor the deaf ( i . e . deprived of hearing the call of Truth ) while they are getting away ( from you ) turning their backs .
Nor can you turn ( these ) blind ( wanting in insight ) from misguidance to the path of guidance . You recite ( with the essential understanding and competence of acceptability ) only to those people who believe in Our Revelations . So it is they who are Muslims . ( You recite to none except them . )
Allah is the One Who created you from a weak thing ( i . e . a sperm drop ) . Then after weakness He generated strength ( of youth ) . Then after strength He produced debility and senility . He creates what He wills ; and He is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And the Day when the Last Hour is established , the evildoers will swear they did not stay ( in the world ) for more than an hour . They used to turn back ( from Truth ) in the same manner ( in the world as well ) .
And those blessed with knowledge and faith will say ( to them ) : Indeed , according to the Book of Allah , you have stayed till the Day of Resurrection ( instead of one hour ) . So this is the Day of Resurrection but you did not know it .
So on that Day the excuse of the wrongdoers will not be of any benefit to them , nor will they be asked to please ( Allah ) .
And in truth We have elucidated every type of example in this Quran for the people ( to make them understand ) . And if you bring to them some ( visible ) Sign even then these disbelieving people will certainly say : You are doing only falsehood and fraud .
That is how Allah seals the hearts of the people who do not know ( the Truth ) .
So be steadfast . Verily the Promise of Allah is true . Let not those who lack certitude of faith enfeeble you ( on account of the grief over their straying and discomfort for their guidance . O life of the universe , let not their disbelief become a grief consuming your soul ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are verses of the Book of Wisdom .
Guidance and mercy for the pious .
Who establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and those who believe in the Hereafter .
It is they who are following guidance from their Lord and it is they who will prosper .
And of people there are those who buy absurd narrations to make the people lacking in knowledge lose the path of Allah and to mock this ( path ) . It is they for whom there is painful torment .
And when Our Revelations are recited to such a one , he turns his face away showing arrogance as though he had not heard it at all , as if there were weight ( of deafness ) in his ears . So give him the news of an agonizing torment .
Undoubtedly those who believe and keep doing good deeds , for them are Gardens of Bliss .
( They ) will live in them forever . The Promise of Allah is true . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
He created the heavens without pillars ( as ) you see them and He placed firm mountains in the earth so that it might not quake carrying you ( during rotation ) and He spread in it all kinds of animals . And We sent down water from the heaven and We caused to grow in it all kinds of fine and useful vegetation .
This is Allahs Creation . So , ( O polytheists , ) show Me what others , apart from Allah , have created . In truth , the wrongdoers are in open error .
And surely We blessed Luqman with wisdom and sound judgment ( and said to him : ) Be grateful to Allah . And whoever gives thanks , thanks for his own good and whoever attempts ingratitude then surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , ( Himself ) Worthy of all praise .
And ( recall ) when Luqman said to his son , and he was advising him : O my son , do not set up partners with Allah . Verily associating partners with Allah is a very grave injustice .
And We enjoined upon man emphatically ( to do good ) in relation to his parents whose mother bore him ( in her reproductive system ) in pain after pain , and whose weaning also takes two years ( and commanded him : ) Give thanks to Me and to your parents . ( You ) have to return to Me alone .
And if both of them struggle with you to make you associate with Me as partner something whose ( reality ) you simply do not know , then do not obey them . And cooperate with them in worldly affairs in a decent manner . But ( in the matter of faith and the Last Hour and the related affairs ) follow someone who adopts the path of turning to Me in repentance and submitting to My injunctions . Then you are to return to Me alone . So I will inform you about the works that you used to do .
( Luqman said : ) O my son , if there is a thing equal to the grain of a mustard seed ( hidden ) inside a rock or in the heavens or in the earth , ( even then ) Allah will bring it forth ( for reckoning on the Day of Judgment ) . Surely Allah is the Subtle Knower of the minutest matters , All - Aware and Most Vigilant ( as well ) .
O my son ! Establish Prayer and enjoin good and forbid evil , and patiently endure every suffering that touches you . Verily , these are matters of great courage and high resolve .
And do not turn your face away from the people ( in arrogance ) nor walk haughtily on earth . Surely Allah does not love anyone arrogant walking gloatingly in self - conceit .
And adopt moderation while walking and keep your voice low . Surely the worst voice is the bray of a donkey .
( O people ! ) Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and He has completed upon you His blessings outwardly as well as inwardly ? And among people there are ( also ) those who dispute about Allah without knowledge and without guidance and without ( any evidence from ) the enlightening Book .
And when it is said to them : Follow this Book which Allah has revealed , they say : Nay , we shall follow ( that ) way which we found our fathers following , even though Satan should be inviting them to the torment of Hell .
And whoever bows his face in obedience to Allah and is also a man of spiritual excellence ( in action and state of mind ) , has firmly grasped a strong handhold . And the end of all deeds returns to Allah alone .
And whoever disbelieves , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) let not his disbelief grieve you . They ( too ) are to return to Us . We shall inform them of the deeds which they used to do . Surely Allah knows best the ( hidden ) contents of the breasts .
We shall provide them a little benefit ( in the world ) then , making them helpless , We shall drive them towards the severe torment .
And if you ask them : Who created the heavens and the earth ? they shall answer : Allah . Say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know .
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . Surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , Worthy of all praise ( by Himself ) .
If ( all ) the trees on earth were pens and the ocean reinforced by seven more oceans was ink , even then the Words of Allah would never be exhausted . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Creating you all and raising you all ( after death ) is ( for Allahs Power ) like ( creating and raising ) a single person . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Have you not seen that Allah makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night ; And ( He is the One Who ) has made the sun and the moon subservient , each rotating for an appointed term and that Allah is Aware of ( all ) the deeds that you do ?
That is because Allah alone is the Truth and those whom these people worship besides Allah are false and that Allah is Most High , the Supreme .
Have you not seen that vessels sail on the sea by Allahs Bounty so that He shows you some of His Signs ? Surely there are Signs in it for every greatly steadfast and grateful person .
And when the sea wave engulfs them like ( clouds or towering mountains or ) canopies they ( the disbelievers and polytheists ) start calling upon Allah , dedicating their most sincere devotion to Him alone . But when rescuing them He brings them back to land , then only a few of them remain on the moderate path ( i . e . the path of guidance ) . And none but every deceptive and ungrateful person denies Our Signs .
O people ! Fear your Lord and fear that Day when no father will be able to expiate for his son , nor will a son be able to atone for his father . Surely true is the Promise of Allah . So let not the worldly life deceive you nor let the Arch - Deceiver ( Satan ) deceive you concerning Allah .
Surely Allah is the One with Whom is the knowledge of the Last Hour . And He is the One Who sends down rain and knows whatever is in the wombs . And no one knows what ( deed ) he will earn the next day nor does any one know in what land he will die . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware ( i . e . Self - Knowing and fully Aware of everything besides Him . He Himself Knows everything and also informs him whom He likes ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
There is not even an iota of doubt in it that sending down of this Book is from the Lord of all the worlds .
Do the disbelievers and the polytheists say this : He ( the Holy Prophet ) has fabricated it ? Nay , it is the Truth from your Lord so that you may warn those to whom no Warner has come before you that they may receive guidance .
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them in six days ( i . e . six phases ) . He then settled Himself on the Throne ( the Command and Control System of universe , befitting His Glory ) . You have no helper or intercessor apart from Him . So do you not accept direction and guidance ?
He plans and executes the Command and Control System from the heavens to the earth . Then His Command ascends ( and will ascend to completion ) towards Him in one Day which measures one thousand years according to ( the number ) that you count .
He is the One Who knows the unseen and the visible , Almighty and Ever - Merciful .
He is the One Who endowed everything He created with perfection and virtue . And He initiated the genesis of man from clay ( i . e . inorganic matter ) .
Then He linked up lineage of his kind from the extract of a lowly fluid ( a sperm drop ) .
Then He perfected ( organs and limbs in ) him and breathed into him of His spirit ( i . e . life ) and made for you ( also in the mothers womb ) ears and ( then ) eyes and ( then ) hearts and brains . You give thanks but little .
And the disbelievers say : When we are lost in the earth , shall we then be created anew ? In fact they deny the meeting with their Lord .
Say : The angel of death that is appointed over you will terminate your life . Then you will be sent back to your Lord .
And ( you will wonder at them ) if you see the sinners hanging down their heads before the Presence of their Lord ( and saying : ) O our Lord , we have seen and heard , so send us back ( to the world now ) so that we do pious deeds . Surely we believe with certitude .
And had We intended We would have given guidance to every soul ( Ourselves ) , but this Command from Me has been confirmed : I will certainly fill Hell with all the ( disbelieving ) jinn and mankind .
So ( now ) savour the taste that you had forgotten your meeting of this Day . Surely We have forgotten you . And enjoy the flavour of everlasting torment , a reward of your deeds which you continued to do .
So only those who believe in Our Revelations , when directed and guided by means of these ( Verses ) , fall down prostrating themselves and glorify their Lord with praise . And they do not attempt arrogance .
Their sides stay away from their beds and they call out to their Lord in a ( mingled state ) of fear and hope and spend ( in Our Way ) out of the sustenance We have provided them .
So no one knows what coolness of eyes is kept hidden for them . This will be a reward for those ( pious deeds ) which they used to do .
How can a person who is a believer be like him who is disobedient ? ( Nay , ) they ( both ) cannot be equal .
So those who believe and keep doing good deeds , for them are Gardens of eternal repose as an entertainment and honour ( from their Lord ) in reward for those ( works ) which they used to do .
But as for those who disobeyed , their abode is Hell . Every time they will intend to get out of it and escape , they will be turned back into it and it will be said to them : Keep enjoying the taste of this Fire of Hell which you used to belie .
And surely before the major torment ( of the Hereafter ) , We shall make them savour the ( taste of ) nearby torment ( in this world ) so that they abstain ( from disbelief ) .
And who is a greater wrongdoer than someone who is admonished by means of Revelations of His Lord , and then he turns away from them ? Surely We take revenge on the evildoers .
And verily We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( Torah ) . So do not have any doubt with regard to his meeting . ( That meeting is about to take place during the Night of the Ascension . ) And We made it a guidance for the Children of Israel .
And We made from among them authorities and leaders who kept disseminating guidance by Our Command when they persevered with patience . And they believed in Our Revelations with certitude .
Surely your Lord alone will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning matters in which they used to disagree .
And have they not taken any guidance ( from this proclamation ) that how many generations We have destroyed before them in whose dwellings these people ( now ) move about ? Surely there are Signs in it . So do they not hear ?
And have they not seen that We stream water towards the dry land , then with that We produce crops of which their cattle as well as they themselves eat ? Do they not observe ?
And they say : When will this ( Day of ) Judgment take place if you are truthful ?
Say : On the Day of Judgment the belief of disbelievers will bring them no benefit , nor will they be given any respite .
So turn your face away from them and wait and they ( too ) are waiting .
O Prophet ! Remain firm in fearing Allah ( with perseverance as before ) and do not agree at all to what the disbelievers and the hypocrites say ( : conclude with us religious agreement ) . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And continue following this ( Command ) which is revealed to you from your Lord . Surely Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
And maintain your trust in Allah and Sufficient is Allah as a Guardian .
Allah has not made for any man two hearts inside his breast chamber ; nor has He made your wives your mothers whom you call mothers by way of Zihar ( a form of divorce ) . Nor He has made your adopted sons your ( real ) sons . These are merely the utterances of your mouth . And Allah says the Truth and He alone shows the ( straight ) path .
Call them ( the adopted sons ) after their fathers ( names ) . That is most just in the sight of Allah . So if you do not know their fathers , then they are your brothers ( in Din [ Religion ] ) and your friends . And there is no sin on you for what you said by mistake but ( that will be a sure sin ) which your hearts intend . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
This ( Esteemed ) Prophet is nearer to and has a greater claim on the believers than their own souls and his ( pure ) wives are their mothers . And blood relations have a greater claim one to another ( in the distribution of inheritance ) in the Book of Allah than ( the rest of ) the believers and the emigrants except that you desire to do favour to your friends . This Command is written in the Book of Allah .
And , ( O Beloved , recall ) when We took a covenant from the Prophets ( to preach faith in their Prophethood ) and ( specially ) from you and from Nuh ( Noah ) and from Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus ) son of Mayam ( Mary ) and We took from them a solemn covenant .
So that ( Allah ) may ask the Truthful about their truth . And He has prepared an agonizing torment for the disbelievers .
O believers ! Recall Allahs favour to you when the forces ( of disbelievers ) came upon you . Then We sent wind and troops ( of angels ) against them whom you did not see . And Allah sees best what you do .
When they ( the disbelievers ) invaded you from above ( the eastern side of the valley ) and from below ( the western side of the valley ) , and when ( your ) eyes were distracted ( with terror ) , and ( your ) hearts rose up to your throats ( with horror ) , and you began to think various uncertainties about Allah ( in a state of fear and hope ) .
At that stage the believers were put to trial and were shaken with mighty jolts .
And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease ( of instability of faith and doubt and suspicion ) said : Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peae be upon him ] gave us a promise ( of victory ) just to deceive and betray .
And when a party of them said : O people of Yathrib ! There is no position left for you to stay ( safely ) , so go back ( home ) , and a party of them began to seek permission from the Holy Prophet ( to go back ) , saying : Our houses are lying exposed , whereas their houses were not exposed ; they only wanted to escape ( on this pretext ) .
And if the armies had entered upon them from all the sides of Madina and they ( the hypocrites ) had been asked pertaining to the subversion ( of disbelief and polytheism ) , they would have accepted ( the demand ) and would not have delayed it except for a little pause .
And certainly before this they had made a covenant with Allah that they would not turn their backs and run away . And the covenant made with Allah will ( certainly ) be asked about .
Say : Escape will not benefit you at all . If you seek to flee ( fearing ) death or slaughter you will gain little ( from life ) except a brief time out .
Say : Who is the one that can protect you from Allah if He intends to afflict you with suffering or to bestow upon you His Mercy ? And they will not find for themselves any protector or helper apart from Allah .
Surely Allah knows those among you who hinder ( from the Holy Prophet and from fighting in his holy companionship ) and who say to their brothers : Come to us . And they themselves come to fight but little .
( They do so ) being miserly in your case . But when a fear ( situation ) arises , you will see them looking at you , their eyes rolling like those of someone fainting into death . But when fear departs , they offend you with sharp tongues ( injuring heart ) . They are ( in a state of feeling ) too greedy for booty . ( In fact ) they have not yet believed . So Allah has annulled all their deeds . And that is easy for Allah .
They ( still ) imagine that the disbelievers troops have not yet gone ( back ) , and if those troops should come ( again ) they would wish them join villagers settling as nomads and ( conduct surveillance to ) collect news about you . And even if they were among you they would not fight except a very few .
In truth in ( the holy being of ) Allahs Messenger [ blessings and peae be upon him ] there is for you a most perfect and beautiful model ( of life ) for every such person that expects and aspires to ( meeting ) Allah and the Last Day and remembers Allah abundantly .
And when the believers saw the armies ( of disbelievers ) they said : This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us and Allah and His Messenger have spoken the truth . So this ( spectacle ) increased their faith and their commitment to submission to Allah .
Among the believers ( a great number of ) men proved true what covenant they made with Allah . Of them is someone who has fulfilled his vow ( by attaining to martyrdom ) , and of them is someone who is waiting ( for his turn ) . But they have not changed ( their covenant ) in the least .
That Allah may reward the Truthful for their truth and may torment the hypocrites if He wills or may accept their repentance . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And Allah repulsed the disbelievers ( from Madina , defeated , ) with the burning of their rage , for they badly failed to achieve any success . And Allah was Sufficient for the believers in the battle ( of Ahzab [ the Confederates ] ) . And Allah is Ever - Strong , All - Powerful .
And the People of the Book ( among the Banu Quraiza tribe ) who helped those ( disbelievers ) , Allah brought them ( also ) down from their fortresses and filled their hearts with the fear ( of Islam ) . You kill a party of them ( for their war crimes ) and make the other party the prisoners of war .
And He made you the owners of the land , the houses and the wealth and properties of these ( war enemies ) and the ( captured ) territory where you had not even stepped in ( before ) . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Say to your wives : If you long for the world and its glitter , then come ! I shall make a provision for you and set you free in a handsome manner .
But if you long for Allah and His Messenger and the House of the Hereafter then surely Allah has prepared for the pious among you a tremendous reward .
O Wives of the ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Whoever of you commits an obvious indecency , the torment for her will be doubled and that is very easy for Allah .
And those of you who remain obedient to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and persist in pious works , We shall give them double of their reward and We have prepared for them honourable sustenance ( in Paradise ) .
O Wives of the Messenger ! You are not the like of any of the womenfolk . If you want to remain pious and Godfearing , then be not soft in your speech ( while talking to men as and when required ) lest someone whose heart is diseased ( with hypocrisy ) should feel inclined with desire . And ( always ) say words which are pure of any taint of doubt and flexibility .
And remain in your houses with calm and peace and do not display adornment like that of the days of ignorance and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and keep obeying Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . Allah intends only to remove all impurity of sins from you , O People of the House ( of the Prophet , [ even a doubt or trace of shortfall , ] ) and make you absolutely pure and clean by blessing you with ( perfect ) purity and wholesomeness .
And always remember the Revelations of Allah and the tradition and wisdom ( of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) which are recited in your homes . Surely Allah is the Master of subtleties ( for His favourite servants - Awliya ) and Well Aware ( of all His Creation ) .
Surely the submissive men and the submissive women , and the believing men and the believing women , and the obedient men and the obedient women , and the truthful men and the truthful women , and the steadfast men and the steadfast women , and the humble men and the humble women , and the men who give alms and the women who give alms , and the men who fast and the women who fast , and the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard their chastity , and the men who remember Allah excessively and the women who remember Allah very much Allah has prepared for all of them forgiveness and a mighty reward .
And neither a believing man nor a believing woman has ( this ) right that , when Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) have once given judgment ( or command ) on an affair , they should exercise their own choice in ( doing or not doing that ) work of theirs . And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) certainly loses his way into open error .
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when you said to him whom Allah had favoured and you ( too ) had done him a favour : Keep your wife ( Zainab ) with you in the bond of marriage and fear Allah . And you were keeping that secret in your heart which Allah was about to reveal . And you had ( for decency ) the fear of ( scoffs of ) people ( in your heart . O Beloved ! You were not required to care for people . ) And Allah alone has a greater right that you should fear Him ( and who is more Godfearing than you ! ) So when ( your adopted ) Zaid fulfilled his desire to divorce her , We married her to you so that there is no blame on the believers for ( marrying ) the wives of their adopted sons , while they have no desire for them ( after divorce ) . And Allahs Command had got to be carried out .
And there is no blame on the Prophet in ( accomplishing ) that duty which Allah has made obligatory for him . And certainly the same has been the way and practice of Allah with those ( as well ) who have passed away before . And the Command of Allah is a decree which has been fulfilled .
And those ( bygone ) people used to communicate the messages of Allah , and feared Him , and were afraid of none but Allah . And Allah is Sufficient as a Reckoner .
Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is not the father of any of your men , but he is the Messenger of Allah and the Last of the Prophets ( ending the chain of the Prophets ) . And Allah is the Perfect Knower of everything .
O Believers ! Keep remembering Allah abundantly .
And glorify Him morning and evening .
He is the One Who sends peace and blessings on you and His angels as well , so that He may take you out of the layers of darkness into the light . And He is Ever - Merciful to the believers .
On the Day when they ( the believers ) will meet Him , their gift ( of the meeting greeting ) will be : Peace ! And He has kept ready for them most honourable reward .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Surely We have sent you as a Witness ( to the Truth and the Creation ) , a Bearer of glad tidings ( of the Beauty of the Hereafter ) and a Warner ( of the Torment in the Hereafter ) .
And ( as ) an Inviter towards Allah by His Command and as a Sun spreading Light .
And give good news to the believers that there is for them Allahs great Bounty ( that they are cloaked in the affinity of slavery to this Final Messenger of Allah ) .
And never ( ever ) agree to what the disbelievers and hypocrites say : ( conclude with us a religious agreement ) . And disregard their hurtful misbehaviour , and maintain your trust in Allah ( with persistence ) . And Allah alone is Sufficient as a Guardian ( in the conflict between the Truth and falsehood ) .
O Believers ! When you marry the believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them ( i . e . had sexual intercourse with them ) , then no waiting period is ( obligatory ) on them for you which you may start counting . So give them some provision and send them off nicely extending to them excellent morality .
O Prophet ! Surely We have made lawful for you those of your wives whom you have paid their dower and those who are in your possession ( according to Allahs Commandments ) whom Allah has given you as spoils of war , and the daughters of your paternal uncles , and the daughters of your paternal aunts , and the daughters of your maternal uncles , and the daughters of your maternal aunts who have emigrated with you , and any other believing woman who dedicates herself to the Holy Prophet ( for marriage ) provided the Holy Prophet ( too ) has the intention to marry her ( so all these are lawful for you . This Command is ) exclusively for you alone , not for other believers ( of the Umma [ Community ] ) . Indeed We know best what We have prescribed for them ( the Muslims ) concerning their wives and the slave girls they possess . ( But this exclusive Command for lawfulness of number of wives in your respect has been given ) so that there remains for you no bottleneck ( in making elaborate arrangements for the education and training of the women of the Muslim Umma [ Community ] ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Prophet ! You have free choice ) to postpone ( the turn of ) any ( wife ) whom you may please from among your wives and keep with you ( any of them on priority ) whom you may please . And there is no blame on you if you desire her ( to be with you ) from whom you kept distance ( for a while ) . This makes possible for them cooling their eyes ( by seeing you ) and they will not remain grieved and they all will feel pleased and delighted for what you have blessed them with . And Allah knows best what is in your hearts and Allah is All - Knowing , Forbearing .
After that ( they have preferred your pleasure and your service to the worldly benefits ) , it is not lawful for you also ( to marry ) more women ( so that these wives alone may enjoy the distinction of their glory ) . Nor is it lawful that ( in case of divorce to some and regarding it Our Command to maintain the present number of wives ) you take ( into marriage ) other wives in their place , even though their beauty ( of behaviour , moral conduct and style of preaching Din [ Religion ] ) may seem to you pleasingly excellent . But the slave girl that is in your possession ( by Our Command is lawful ) . And Allah is Ever Watchful over everything .
O Believers ! Do not enter the houses of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] unless permission is granted to you for a meal . Nor ( reach so early as to ) wait for the cooking of the meal . But when you are invited then enter ( at that time ) . Then when you have eaten the meal , ( get up from there and ) disperse without delay and do not linger on in eagerness for talk .
Surely your ( sitting for long in this ) manner discomforts the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ; and he feels reluctant to ( ask ) you ( to leave ) but Allah does not hesitate in ( saying ) the Truth .
And when you ask them ( the pure wives ) for something , ask them from behind a curtain .
This ( regard and nice manner ) causes great purity for your hearts and for their hearts .
And it is not ( at all lawful ) for you that you cause inconvenience to the Holy Messenger of Allah [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , nor is this ( lawful ) that you marry his ( pure ) wives after him , till the end of time .
Surely it is the most grievous sin in the sight of Allah .
Whether you disclose something or conceal it , Allah is certainly the Most Perfect Knower of everything .
There is no sin on them ( if they do not veil themselves ) from their ( real ) fathers , and their sons , their brothers , their brothers sons , their sisters sons , their own ( Muslim ) women and from those slave girls whom they possess . Keep fearing Allah . Surely Allah is Witness to and Ever - Watchful over everything .
Surely Allah and ( all ) His angels invoke blessings and greetings on the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . O Believers ! You ( also ) send blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation of peace abundantly ( and fervently ) .
Surely those who offend Allah and His Prophet , Allah curses them in the world and in the Hereafter and He has prepared for them a disgraceful torment .
And those who hurt the believing men and the believing women without their doing anything ( wrong ) , surely they bear ( on themselves ) the burden of a false allegation and an open sin .
O Prophet ! Say to your wives , your daughters and the women of believers that ( while going out ) they should draw their veils as coverings over them . It is more likely that this way they may be recognized ( as pious , free women ) and may not be hurt ( considered by mistake as roving slave girls ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is the disease ( of malice and insolence against the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and ( likewise ) those who spread false rumours in Madina do not desist , then We shall certainly make you overmaster them . Then they will not be able to stay in the neighbourhood of Madina but for a few ( days ) .
( These ) accursed people ( who spread false rumours , promote hatred , strife and terrorism and denigrate the Holy Messenger and his family ) , wherever found , are to be seized and mercilessly killed by way of target killing .
This practice of Allah has ( continued ) through generations that have passed before , and you will never find any amendment in the way practised by Allah .
The people ask you about ( the Hour of ) Resurrection . Say : Its knowledge is with Allah alone . And who has made you awareit may be that the Last Hour has drawn near ?
Surely Allah has cursed the disbelievers and has kept ready for them the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
They will live in it forever . They will find neither any caring friend nor any supporting helper .
On the Day when their faces will be ( repeatedly ) turned over in the Fire of Hell , they will say : Alas ! Would that we had obeyed Allah and we had obeyed the Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) !
And they will say : O our Lord , surely we abided by what our chiefs and the influential ones directed , so they turned us away from the ( straight ) path .
O our Lord ! Afflict them with double torment and lay on them a mighty curse .
O Believers ! Do not be like those who hurt Musa ( [ Moses ] by means of their denigrating words ) . So Allah proved him clear of the blames which they levelled against him . And he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) had great honour and high standing in the sight of Allah .
O Believers ! Always fear Allah and say what is correct and straight .
He will set ( all ) your deeds right for you and will forgive you your sins . And whoever obeys Allah and His Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] will surely achieve a great success .
Indeed We offered the Trust ( of Obedience ) to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they declined to bear this ( burden ) and felt scared of it but man took it on . Verily he is ever so wrongdoing ( against his own soul ) , unwise and extremely ignorant ( of the consequence of lapse in paying back the trust ) .
( This is ) so because Allah may torment the hypocrites , men and women , and the polytheists , men and women , and Allah may accept repentance of the believers , men and women . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
All praise be to Allah alone to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to Him belongs praise in the Hereafter ( as well ) . And He is All - Wise , Well Aware .
He knows ( all ) the things that go into the earth and that come out from it and those that descend from heaven and that ascend to it . And He is Ever - Merciful , Most Forgiving .
And the disbelievers say : The Last Hour will not come upon us . Say : Why not ? By my Lord Who is the Knower of the Unseen that is bound to come upon you . Nothing can be out of His sight , not even a dust particle in the heavens or in the earth . Nor is there anything smaller or bigger than an atom but is ( recorded ) in the light - giving Book ( i . e . al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
In order that Allah may recompense in full those who believe and continue doing good deeds . It is they for whom there is forgiveness and honourable sustenance ( for the Last Day ) .
And those who strived in ( opposition to ) Our Revelations presuming to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they for whom there is punishment of a highly agonizing torment .
And those who have been given knowledge know that ( the Book ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord is alone the Truth . And that ( Book ) guides to the path of Most Exalted in Might , All - Praiseworthy ( Lord ) .
And the disbelievers say ( with the intention to wonder and mock ) : Shall we tell you of a person who informs you that when you have decomposed completely into dust particles ( after death ) , you will certainly be composed into a new creation ?
( Either ) he has invented a lie against Allah or he is insane . ( Nothing of the sort ! ) The truth is that those who do not believe in the Hereafter are undergoing a torment and are in farthest error .
So have they not seen those ( Signs ) in the heaven and the earth ( which have beset them ) from their front and from their rear ? If We so intend We would sink them into the earth or let a part of the sky fall upon them . Verily there is in it a Sign for every servant of Allah who turns to Him .
And indeed We bestowed on Dawud ( David ) a tremendous favour from Our Presence ( and ordained : ) O mountains , join him in chanting melodious tunes ( of Our glory and praise ) . And ( We gave the same command ) to the birds as well ( making them subservient ) . And We made iron soft for him .
( And commanded : ) Make wide and full - length coats of mail and care for the measure while joining ( their ) links ( rings ) . And , ( O Family of Dawud [ David ] , ) continue doing pious deeds . I am watching minutely the works that you do .
And to Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] We made subservient ) the wind whose morning course was a months journey and the evening course ( too ) was a months journey . And We caused a spring of molten copper to flow for him and ( made subservient to him ) some jinn who worked in front of him by the Command of his Lord . ( And We had warned that ) whoever of them turned away from Our Command We would make him taste the Blazing Fire of Hell .
They ( the jinn ) used to make for him whatever he desired of lofty and strong fortresses and statues and basins large as reservoirs looking like huge cauldrons fixed in their places . O Family of Dawud ( David ) ! Keep giving thanks ( to Allah ) . And very few of My servants have been grateful !
And when We decreed Sulaimans ( Solomons ) death , nothing made them ( the jinn ) aware of his death except a termite of the earth which kept eating his staff . Then when his body came to the ground it became known to the jinn that if they had known the Unseen , they would not have been in that humiliating torment .
In fact for ( the people of ) Saba ( Sheba ) a sign did exist in their homeland itself . ( They ) were two gardens , one on the right hand and the other on the left . ( They were commanded : ) Eat of the provision from your Lord and keep giving Him thanks . ( How ) pure is ( your ) city and a Lord , Most Forgiving !
Then they turned away ( from obedience ) . So We let loose against them a devastating flood , and We converted both their gardens into ( such ) gardens as bearing sour and bitter fruit and tamarisks and a few lote - trees .
So We paid them back for their disbelief and ingratitude . And We award ( such ) punishment to none except the highly ungrateful .
And We set up prominent ( and ) adjacent settlements between the dwellers and those towns that We had blessed ( on the Yemen - Syria highway ) , and We had placed between them stopover motels ( for rest ) while travelling up and down , that you may move between them by night and by day in peace and security .
Then they said : O our Lord , place between our break - journey points longer distances . And they wronged their souls . So We made them tales ( for a lesson of warning ) . And We disintegrated them into pieces and scattered them . Surely there are signs in it for a greatly patient and highly thankful person .
No doubt Iblis translated his idea about them into reality . So they followed him except a group comprising ( the true ) believers .
And Satan had no power over them but for the reason that We might distinguish those who believe in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt about it . And your Lord is Watchful over everything .
Say : Call upon those you consider ( gods ) apart from Allah . They do not possess even the smallest particle either in the heavens or in the earth . They have no share in either of them ( the heavens and the earth ) . Nor is anyone of them a helper to Allah .
And no intercession with His Holy Presence will be of any benefit except from someone He has granted permission , until when fright is removed from their hearts and they will say , ( inquiring ) : What has your Lord said ? They will say ( in reply ) : He has said the Truth , ( i . e . has granted the permission ) . And He alone is Most High , Most Great .
Say : Who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? Say ( yourself ) : Allah ( provides ) . And no doubt either we or you are guided aright or lost in open error .
Say : You will not be asked about the sin that ( you presume ) we have perpetrated . Nor shall we be asked about what you do .
Say : Our Lord will assemble all of us ( on the Day of Rising ) , then will judge among us with the Truth . And He is the Best Judge , All - Knowing .
Say : Show me the partners you have associated with Allah . There is no ( partner ) at all . Truly He is the One Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
And , ( O Esteemed Prophet , ) We have not sent you but as a Bearer of the glad tidings and as a Warner to the entire mankind , but most people do not know .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Last Hour ) come true if you are truthful ?
Say : The Day of Promise is appointed for you . You will not be able to either put it back for a moment or put it forward .
And the disbelievers say : We shall not believe in this Quran or in that ( Revelation ) at all which came before it . And if you could see when the wrongdoers shall be made to stand before their Lord , ( what a spectacle would that be ! ) Everyone of them will be putting the blame back on others . The humble will say to the conceited : Had you not been there we would certainly have believed .
The conceited will say to the humble : Did we hinder you from guidance after it had come to you ? The truth is that you were evildoers yourselves .
The humble will then say to the conceited : Nay , it was ( your ) deceptive scheming night and day ( that hindered us ) when you used to order us to disbelieve in Allah and assign equals to Him . And they will hide their pang of guilt ( from one another ) when they will see the torment . And We will put iron collars round the necks of the disbelievers and they will be recompensed only for their doings .
And never did We send a Warner to any town but its wealthy ones would ( always ) say : We deny ( the guidance ) you have been sent with .
And they said : We are super respecting wealth and children and we are not going to be tormented .
Say : Surely my Lord releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains ( for whom He likes ) but most people do not know .
And it is not your wealth or your children that can bring you nearness and intimacy in Our Presence . But whoever believes and does good works , it is they for whom the reward is twofold for their works . And they will live in peace in lofty mansions ( of Paradise ) .
And those who strive ( in opposition ) to Our Revelations presuming to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they who will be brought to the torment .
Say : Surely my Lord releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains for whom ( He likes ) . And whatever you spend ( in the way of Allah ) , He will increase it with more in recompense . And He is the Best Sustainer .
And the Day when He will gather all together , then He will say to the angels : Is it they who used to worship you ?
They will submit : Glory be to You ; You alone are our Protector , not they ! In fact they used to worship the jinn . It was in them that most of them believed .
So Today you have no authority over profit or loss of one another . And We shall say to the wrongdoers : Savour the taste of the torment of Hell that you used to belie .
And when Our illumining Verses are recited to them , they say : This ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) is only a man who wants to hinder you from those ( idols ) your fathers used to worship . And they ( also ) say : This ( Quran ) is merely a fabricated lie . And the disbelievers ( also ) say about this Truth ( the Quran ) while it has come to them : It is nothing but obvious magic .
And neither did We give them ( i . e . the residents of Makka ) the revealed Books which they would recite , nor did We send to them any Warner before you .
And the preceding communities also denied ( the Truth ) . And they have not yet attained to even one tenth of what We granted them ( i . e . the bygone people ) . But they too denied My Messengers . So how ( awful ) did My denial ( proved ) to be !
Say : I advise you but only one thing : stand up for Allah in twos or singly ( warned and spiritually awake ) . Then meditate ( i . e . inspect the reality and introspect ; the Truth will dawn on you ) that he ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) who has honoured you with his companionship is not even touched by any mania . He is but a Warner giving you ( timely ) warning before the severe torment ( comes , so that you may wake up from neglectfulness and unawareness ) .
Say : Any reward that I might have sought from you ( for this favour ) , I have given that back to you . My reward is with Allah alone . And He keeps watch over everything .
Say : My Lord reveals the Truth ( to the Prophets . He ) is the All - Knower of all the Unseen .
Say : The Truth has come and falsehood can neither originate ( anything ) nor can it regenerate .
Say : If I were to lose the straight path , the sin ( or harm ) of losing the straight path would afflict only my soul , and if I am rightly guided it is so because my Lord sends His Revelation to me . Surely He is All - Hearing , Ever - Near .
And if you visualize ( their plight ) when they will be most upset , they will not then be able to escape and will be seized from a nearby place .
And they will say : We have believed in it . But how can they now attain to ( faith ) from ( such ) a far - off place ?
In fact they had disbelieved before this . And they have been throwing arrows of falsehood and doubt without seeing from a distant place .
And a barrier was placed between them and their desires , as was done before with the people of their kind . Surely they were suffering from a deceiving doubt .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Creator of ( all the infinities of ) the heavens and the earth , and Who makes the angels messengers having two or three or four wings , and adds to ( and expands ) the Creation as He wills . Surely Allah is All - Powerful over everything .
Whatever of ( the treasure of ) His Mercy Allah opens to mankind there is none who can withhold it . And whatever He withholds then after this there is none who may release it . And He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
O people ! Remember persistently the favour that Allah has bestowed on you . Is there any Creator other than Allah who may provide you sustenance from the heaven and the earth ? There is no God but He . So where are you wandering disorientated ?
And if they reject you , many Messengers have been rejected before you . And all matters will be returned to Allah alone .
O people ! Certainly the Promise of Allah is true . So let not the worldly life deceive you at all . Nor let the Arch - Deceiver Satan deceive you ( in the Name ) of Allah .
Assuredly Satan is your enemy , so you too keep treating him as an enemy ( being his adversary ) . He calls his party only to make them join the inmates of Hell .
There is a severe torment for those who disbelieve and there is forgiveness and a mighty reward for those who believe and keep doing pious deeds .
So what about him whose evil action has been made attractive to him but he starts considering it good ( actually ? Can he be like a virtuous believer ? ) Surely Allah holds astray whoever He wills and guides to the straight path whoever He wills . ( O life of the universe ! ) Let not your soul waste away in grief for them . Surely Allah is Best Aware of whatever they do .
And Allah alone sends winds that raise and build up clouds . Then We drive it ( the cloud ) towards some dry and dead land to water it . Then with that We give life to the earth after its death . Similar will be the process of rising ( of the dead alive ) .
Whoever desires honour then to Allah belongs all honour . The pure words ascend to Him alone and He is the One Who elevates ( the grades of ) a pious deed . And those who keep engaged in evil maneuvers , for them is severe punishment and their deceiving schemes will go void .
And Allah alone created you from clay ( i . e . inorganic matter ) , then from a sperm drop , then He made you pairs . And no female conceives nor gives birth but with His knowledge . And no aged mans life is increased nor is his age decreased but ( all this ) is recorded in a Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) . That surely is quite easy for Allah .
And two seas ( or rivers ) cannot be the same : this ( one ) is sweet , thirst - quenching and pleasant to drink and that ( other ) is salty and very bitter . And you eat fresh meat from each and bring forth ornaments ( including pearls and corals ) that you wear . And you see in them boats ( and ships ) that chop through ( the water ) , so that you may seek His bounty ( through marine trade routes ) and that you may become grateful .
He causes the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night . And He has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a system ) , each rotating for an appointed term . Such is Allah your Lord . His is all the Sovereignty . And the idols that you worship apart from Him do not own ( even ) the thin membrane of a date stone .
( O polytheists ! ) If you call upon them , they ( are idols ; ) they cannot hear your call . But if ( supposing ) they hear they cannot give you an answer . And on the Day of Resurrection they will downright deny your setting up partners with Allah . And none will make you aware like Allah , Well Aware .
O mankind ! You all are dependent upon Allah and Allah is the One Who is Independent , Most Praiseworthy .
If He wills , He will destroy you and bring in a new creation .
And that is not at all difficult for Allah .
And no bearer of burden will bear anothers burden ( of sins ) . And if someone heavily loaded calls ( another ) to share his load , nothing of his burden will be carried by him even though he be a close relative . ( O Beloved ! ) You warn but those who fear their Lord unseen and establish Prayer . And whoever acquires purity does so to his own benefit . And to Allah is the return .
And the blind and the seeing cannot be alike .
Nor ( can ) the darkness and the light ( be alike ) .
And nor the shade and the hot sun .
And nor the living and the dead can be alike . Surely Allah makes him hear whom He wills , and it is not your responsibility to make those hear who are ( buried ) in the graves ( i . e . you are not responsible to make the disbelievers accept what you say ) .
You are only a Warner .
Surely We have sent you with the Truth and Guidance as a Bearer of good news and a Warner ( for the Hereafter ) . And there is not a single Umma ( Community ) but among whom did pass ( some ) Warner .
And if they deny you then surely the people before you have ( also ) denied . Their Messengers came to them ( also ) with clear Signs and Scriptures and the illumining Book .
Then I seized those disbelievers ( with the torment ) . So how ( awful ) proved to be ( their ) denying Me !
Have you not seen that Allah sent down water from the sky ? Then We brought forth with that the fruits which have different colours . And similarly in the mountains there are white and red streaks with a variety of shades and there are deep black ( streaks ) as well .
And likewise there are various colours among men and beasts and animals . So only those of His servants who have knowledge ( of these realities with a vision and outlook ) fear Him . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Forgiving .
Surely those who recite the Book of Allah and establish Prayer and spend secretly and openly in Our Way out of what We have given them look forward to a trade ( in the Hereafter ) which will never run into loss .
So that Allah may pay them their reward in full and may bless them more out of His bounty . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative of thanks .
And the Book ( the Quran ) that We have revealed to you is the Truth and confirms the former Books . Surely Allah is Well Aware of His servants , All - Seeing .
Then We made those We chose from among Our servants ( i . e . the Muslim Umma [ Community ] ) the inheritors of the Book ( the Quran ) . So of them are those who wrong their own souls , and of them are also those who are moderate following the middle course , and of them are still those who excel in doing pious deeds by Allahs Command . This ( excelling and becoming perfect ) is but great Bounty ( of Allah ) .
They shall enter the Gardens of Adn ( Eden Paradise for eternal stay ) . Therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls and their dress will be made of silk .
And they will say : All gratitude and praise belong to Allah Who has removed from us all grief . Surely our Lord is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative of gratitude .
Who has , out of His Bounty , admitted us to a timeless abode wherein will touch us neither labour nor fatigue .
And those who disbelieved , for them is the Fire of Hell . Neither will ( death ) be decreed for them that they should die ; nor will anything of their torment be lessened . We pay back every disobedient the same way .
And they will howl in Hell : O our Lord , take us out ( from here ) . We shall ( now ) do righteous works different from those ( works ) we used to do ( before ) . ( Allah will say : ) Did We not grant you long enough life during which whoever wanted to seek advice might reflect ? And ( moreover ) a Warner too had come to you . So savour now the taste ( of the torment ) , and there will be no helper for the wrongdoers .
Surely Allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth . He is undoubtedly Well Aware of things ( hidden ) in breasts .
He is the One Who made you successors ( of former communities ) in the earth . So the one who disbelieves , is to face the suffering of disbelief . And the denial of the disbelievers increases for them nothing in the sight of their Lord except His displeasure . And the infidels disbelief adds to them nothing but loss .
Say : Have you seen your partner - gods you worship apart from Allah ? Show me what they have created of the earth . Or do they have any share in ( the creation of ) the heavens ? Or have We given them any Book so that they stick to its evidence ? ( Nothing at all ! ) In fact the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but deception .
Surely Allah is holding the heavens and the earth ( through His Control System ) lest they should move away ( from their respective locations and orbits / routes ) . And if they both start deviating , then none can hold them both after Him . Surely He is Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And they used to swear solemn oaths by Allah that if a Warner came to them , they would certainly be far more on the straight path than any other community . But when the Warner ( the Final Messenger of Allah [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) came to them it only increased their aversion to the Truth .
( They opted ) to consider themselves the greatest in the earth and to maneuver evil schemes . And the evil schemes encompass only the schemer . So they are waiting ( for nothing ) but the pattern of ( torment that seized ) the bygone people . And you will not find any amendments in Allah ' s Sunna . Nor will you find divergence ( and digression ) in Allah ' s Sunna .
Have they not travelled in the land and seen what was the end of people who have passed before them ? They were far more powerful than these people are . And Allah is not such as anything in the heavens or ( anything ) in the earth can make Him helpless . Indeed He is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And if Allah were to seize people ( by torment ) for the ( evil ) deeds which they have earned , He would not spare any moving creature on the surface of the earth . But He is giving them respite till an appointed time . Then when their appointed time comes , Allah is Ever - Vigilant of His servants .
Ya - Sin . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By the Quran , full of Wisdom .
You are indeed one of the Messengers .
On the Straight Path .
This is revealed by Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
That you may warn the people whose fathers were ( also ) not warned . So they are careless and neglectful .
In fact Our Command has proved true against most of them . So they will not believe .
Surely We have put iron collars round their necks reaching their chins . So they have raised their heads up .
And We have set a wall before them and a wall behind them , and We have cast a veil over their eyes so they do not see anything .
And it is all the same for them whether you warn or do not warn them , they will not believe .
You can only warn him who follows the direction and guidance and fears the Most Kind Lord unseen . So give him the good news of forgiveness and a reward of great honour .
Surely We alone raise the dead alive . And We are writing down ( the deeds ) which they have sent forward and their effects ( that are left behind ) . And We have encompassed everything in the illumining Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
And ( in story - telling style ) narrate to them the example of the people of a city ( Antioch - an ancient city in North Syria ) , when there came to them some Messengers .
When ( at first ) We sent to them two Messengers , they rejected them both . Then We reinforced ( them ) with a third ( Messenger ) . Then the three of them said : Surely we have been sent to you .
( The people of the city ) said : You are but human beings like us , and the Most Kind Lord has not sent down anything . You are only lying .
( The Messengers ) said : Our Lord knows that assuredly we have been sent to you .
And there is no binding upon us except to communicate the message expressly .
( The people of the city ) said : An evil omen has reached us from you . If you do not desist , we shall certainly stone you and you will definitely suffer an agonizing punishment at our hands .
( The Messengers ) said : Your evil omen is with you . Is it an evil omen that you are admonished ? Nay , but you are a people who exceed limits .
And a person came running from the farthest end of the city . He said : O my people , follow the Messengers .
Follow those who do not ask from you any compensation and who are rightly guided .
And what is the matter with me that I should not worship Him Who has created me and to Him ( all of ) you will be returned ?
Should I take such gods apart from Him ( Allah ) that if the Most Kind Lord intends to do me any harm , their intercession would not bring me any benefit , nor would they be able to rescue me ?
Then , certainly I would be in open error .
Surely , I have believed in your Lord , so listen to me ( attentively ) .
( The disbelievers martyred him ; then it ) was said ( to him ) : ( Come , ) enter Paradise . He said : Alas ! Would that my people knew .
That my Lord has forgiven me and put me among the honoured and near ones .
And , after him , We did not send any army ( of angels ) from the heaven to his people , nor were We to send down ( angels to destroy them ) .
( Their torment ) was nothing but a Mighty Blast , and there were they put out ( dead like charred coal ) .
Ah ! Woe to ( these ) servants ! Never did a Messenger come to them but they used to mock him .
Have they not seen how many communities We destroyed before them , and that now they will not return to them .
But that all of them will be brought before Our Presence ?
And a sign for them is the dead earth to which We gave life , and We brought forth from it ( grain ) ; then they eat of it .
And We produced in it gardens of date - palms and grapes , and also caused some springs as well to gush forth in it .
So that they may eat of its fruits . And it is not their hands that made it . Do they not thank ( even ) then ?
Glory be to Him Who created everything in pairs of those the earth grows and of themselves as well and , ( moreover , ) of the things they do not know .
And ( also ) a sign for them is the night : ( how ) We draw the day out from it ! So then they are left in darkness !
And the sun is always rotating ( non - stop ) for its appointed destination . It is a measure fixed by Almighty , All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
And We have also appointed stages ( of motion and rotation ) of the moon till ( its appearance to the dwellers of the earth wanes to ) the semblance of an old dry branch of a palm - tree .
Neither can the sun ( deviate from its orbit and ) overtake the moon nor can the night precede the day and all ( the stars and planets ) are moving in their ( respective ) orbits .
And a Sign for them is ( also ) that We boarded their fathers ( the Children of Adam ) into the laden Ark of ( Nuh [ Noah ] and saved them ) .
And like this ( Ark ) We made for them ( many other means of transport ) which they ride .
And if We intend We drown them . Then , there will not be any to respond to their cry , nor will they be saved anyway .
Except for Our Mercy and ( this ) provision is for an appointed term .
And when it is said to them : Fear that ( torment ) which is before you and which is behind you so that you may be shown Mercy .
And not a Sign of the Signs of their Lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
And when it is said to them : Spend ( in the way of Allah ) of what Allah has given you , the disbelievers say to the believers : Shall we feed that ( poor ) man whom , if Allah so willed , He would feed ( Himself ) ? You are but ( caught ) in clear error .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Last Hour ) be fulfilled if you are truthful ?
They are simply waiting for a Mighty Blast which will seize them ( all of sudden ) , and they will be disputing among themselves .
Then they will not be able to make a will or to return to their families .
And ( when ) the Trumpet will be blown ( again ) they will come out of the graves at once and run towards their Lord .
( Seeing the horrors of the Hour of Resurrection , ) they will say : Ah , woe to us ! Who has raised us from our sleeping apartments ? This ( coming back to life ) is the same that the Most Kind Lord promised and the Messengers spoke the Truth .
This will only be a Mighty Blast . Then all of them will be brought to Our Presence straight away .
So today no soul will be wronged in the least . Nor will you be rewarded except for the deeds you used to do .
Surely the residents of Paradise will be rejoicing today ( in their ) favourite pastime pursuits ( like spiritual visits , entertainments , sessions of hymns and spiritual musical performance and other favours ) .
They and their wives will be reclining on raised couches under the deep calming shades .
There they will be provided with fruits ( of every kind ) and will find ( available ) everything they will solicit .
Peace ( be upon you ) ! ( This ) greeting will be conveyed ( to them ) from the Ever - Merciful Lord .
And , O evildoers , get aside ( from the righteous ) this Day .
O Children of Adam ! Did I not take this covenant from you not to worship Satan ; no doubt he is your open enemy .
And that you keep worshipping Me alone ? That is the straight path .
And surely he led great many of you astray , so had you not any wisdom ?
This is the same Hell that was being promised to you .
Enter this Hell today , for you kept disbelieving .
Today We shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to Us , and their feet will bear witness to the deeds which they used to earn .
And if We had so willed , We would have obliterated the very marks of their eyes . Then if they would have run on the path , how could they have seen ?
And if We had so intended , We would have defaced them in their places . Then they would have power neither to go forward nor to turn back .
And someone whom We give long life , We cause him to degenerate ( towards childhood and debility ) in strength and disposition . So , do they not have sense ?
And We have not taught him ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) composing poetry , nor does it befit his dignity . This ( Book ) is but direction and guidance and the illumining Quran .
So that it may warn the one who is alive and the word of judgment may be proved against the disbelievers .
Have they not seen that We created for them cattle out of the ( Creation ) We made with Our Mighty Hand ; so they are their owners ?
And We subjected those ( cattle ) to them . So some of them are their riding animals , and they eat some of them .
And there are other benefits and drinks in them as well for them . Then why they do not give thanks ?
And they have made idols their gods other than Allah with the hope that they will be helped .
These idols are incapable of helping them . And these ( disbelievers and polytheists ) will be an army of these ( idols ) that will be brought ( into Hell together ) .
So let not what they utter hurt you . Surely We know whatever they hide and whatever they make public .
Has man not seen that We have created him from a sperm drop ? Even then , he has become an open adversary .
And he ( himself ) puts forth examples for Us and has forgotten ( the truth of ) his creation . He says : Who will give life to bones when they will have been decomposed ?
Say : He Who created them the first time will give them life . And He knows best every Creation .
He Who produces fire for you out of the green tree so now you kindle fire with the same !
And has He Who created the heavens and the earth not the power to create the like of them ( again ) ? Yes indeed ! And He is the Supreme Creator , All - Knowing .
His Command ( of creation ) is only that when He intends ( to create ) something , He says to it : Be , so it instantly becomes ( existent or visible and continues becoming ) .
So , Glory be to Him in Whose Hand ( Power and Control ) is the Sovereignty over everything and to Him you will be returned .
By the parties ranged in close ranks .
And by those who drive away the clouds or by those parties who severely reprimand evils .
Then by those parties that remember Allah ( or ) recite ( the Holy Quran ) .
Surely your God is One .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever ( Creation ) is between them , and the Lord of every point of sunrise .
Surely We have decorated the worlds heaven ( the first heavenly sphere ) with the adornment of stars and planets .
And made ( them ) secure from every rebellious Satan .
They ( satans ) cannot listen to the celestial world . And ( burning brands ) are thrown on them from every side .
To repulse them . And for them is eternal torment .
But that ( Satan ) who snatches away ( something from angels ) a burning brand follows it in chase .
Ask them : Are they harder ( and more difficult ) to create or those things which We have created ( in the heavenly universe ) ? Surely We have created them from a sticky clay .
But you express your wonder while they make fun .
And when they are given advice , they do not accept it .
And when they see some Sign , they mock it .
And say : This is but obvious magic .
What ! When we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we be certainly raised ( alive again ) ?
And shall our forefathers too ( be raised ) ?
Say : Yes , ( of course , ) and you will be disgraced and humiliated ( as well ) .
So , it shall be merely a single Dreadful Shout ( of a stern call ) . So all will suddenly ( rise and ) start staring .
And they will say : Woe to us ! This is the Day of Requital .
( It will be said : Yes , ) this is the same Day of Judgment which you used to reject .
Assemble all those who committed injustice and their companions and followers and those ( false gods as well ) that they used to worship .
Besides Allah . Then take them to the path of Hell .
And halt them ( near the Passage ) ; they will be interrogated .
( It will be said to them : ) What has happened to you that you do not help one another ?
( What help can they provide ? ) For , in truth , they will be standing bending their necks Today .
And turning to one another , they will mutually question .
They will say : Surely it is you who used to come to us from the right side ( i . e . asserting on oath of being right ) .
( Their misleading leaders ) will say : The truth is that it was you yourselves who did not believe .
Nor did we have any authority ( and control ) over you . But you yourselves were a rebellious people .
So the Command of our Lord has been proved against us . ( Now ) we are about to taste ( the torment ) .
So we led you astray . Surely we ourselves had gone astray .
So on that Day they ( all ) will share the torment .
No doubt this is how We deal with the sinners .
Surely , they were such people that when it was said to them : There is no worthy of worship except Allah , they used to show arrogance .
And used to say : Are we going to forsake our gods for the sake of an insane poet ?
( He is neither an insane person nor a poet . ) He has rather brought the Truth ( Din [ Religion ] ) and confirmed the Messengers ( of Allah ) .
Verily , you are about to taste the painful torment .
And you will not be given ( any ) reward but for what you used to do .
( Yes , ) but those ( exalted and chosen ) servants of Allah who have divested themselves of ( their ill - commanding selves and its pursuits ) .
It is they for whom a special provision is appointed ( morning and evening ) .
Fruits ( of every kind ) . And they will be honoured and venerated .
( Abiding ) in Gardens of Bliss and Bounty .
( Making spiritual disclosures ) face to face on raised couches .
Round them will be passed cups of ( sacred ) over - flowing drink .
It will be sparkling white and superbly delicious , a treat for those who drink .
It will neither cause any vertigo nor do any harm , nor will they lose balance ( after drinking it ) .
And beside them will be ( sitting chaste women ) with downcast looks and wide beautiful eyes .
( Fair , white charming complexion , they will look ) as if they were eggs protected from dust .
Then those ( residents of Paradise ) will turn to one another and mutually inquire ( about well - being ) .
One ( of the participants in conversation ) will say ( to the other ) : There was an acquaintance of mine ( who disbelieved in the Hereafter ) .
He used to say ( to me ) : Are you ( also ) of those who confirm and firmly believe ( in these things ) ?
( That ) when we are dead and have become dust and bones , so shall we be requited ( in that condition ) ?
Then he ( the inmate of Paradise ) will say : Will you peep down to see ( him in which plight he is ) ?
Then on peeping down he will find him ( right ) in the middle of Hell .
( He ) will say ( to him ) : By my Lord , you had nearly ruined me .
And had it not been the favour of my Lord I ( too ) would have joined those who are brought ( for torment with you ) .
So ( the inmates of Paradise will gladly ask : ) Shall we not die now ?
Except for the first death ( which we have passed through and have reached here ) and shall we not be ever tormented ?
This is surely the supreme success .
For such ( a success ) the doers should do work .
Well ! Is the hospitality ( of Paradise ) better or the tree of Zaqqum ?
Undoubtedly We have made this ( tree ) a torment for the wrongdoers .
Truly this is a tree that springs out from the bottom of Hell .
The spikes of its fruit are as if heads of ( ugly ) satans .
So the inmates of Hell have to eat of it alone and have to fill their bellies with the same .
Then for sure there will be scalding water mixed ( with pus ) for them after ( eating , which will cut through the gut ) .
Then ( after eating ) surely they will return to Hell ( again ) .
Surely they found their ancestors misguided .
So they are made to rush on in their footsteps .
And in fact most of the former people ( also ) lost the straight path .
And surely We sent the Warners among them as well .
So see how was the end of those who were warned .
Except for the chosen and exalted servants of Allah .
And verily Nuh ( Noah ) cried to Us . So how excellent We are to respond to the prayers !
And We delivered him and his family from the ordeal .
And We made his offspring the only survivors .
And We made his virtuous remembrance endure among the successors ( i . e . the Messengers and their people ) .
Peace be on Nuh ( Noah ) in all the worlds .
Surely We requite the pious the same way .
He was indeed of Our servants blessed with ( perfect ) faith .
Then We drowned the others .
And verily of his party was Ibrahim ( [ Abraham ] as well , on him be peace ) .
When he appeared before his Lord with a purified and submissive heart .
He said to his father ( who was in fact his uncle and he used to call him father for he had brought him up ) and his people : What is it that you worship ?
Do you go for false gods besides Allah , inventing a false allegation ?
Well ! What do you think of the Lord of all the worlds ?
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) cast a look at the stars ( to put them in doubt ) .
And said : I am not well ( so cannot accompany you to the festival ) .
At that they turned their backs on him and left ( for the festival ) .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) went up to their gods ( idols ) quietly and said to them : Do you not eat ?
What is the matter with you that you do not speak ?
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) began striking ( and breaking ) them with full force .
Then the people came to him running ( on returning from the festival ) .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said ( to them ) : Do you worship these ( non - living stones ) which you carve out yourselves .
While Allah has created you and ( all ) your works ?
They said : Raise for him a building ( to burn him ) , then cast him into the blazing fire ( in it ) .
So they attempted to play a trick against Ibrahim ( Abraham ) but We humiliated them ( when the fire eventually turned into a flower garden ) .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : ( Emigrating , ) I am going to my Lord . He will certainly guide me . ( He immigrated to Syria ) .
( Reaching the sacred land , he prayed : ) O my Lord , bless me with ( a son , ) one of the pious .
So We gave him the good news of a very forbearing son ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) .
Then when ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) reached ( the age of ) the ability to run about with him , Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : O my son , I have seen in a dream that I am sacrificing you . So think , what is your opinion ? Ismail ( Ishmael ) said : O my father , do that ( immediately ) which you are being commanded . If Allah wills , you will find me among the patient ( and steadfast ) .
So when both submitted ( to the will of Allah i . e . both surrendered to Allahs Command ) and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) laid him down on his forehead . ( The subsequent sight has not been described . )
And We called out to him : O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) !
( How wonderfully ) have you made your dream really true ! Surely We pay back the spiritually excellent the same way . ( So you are blessed with the prominence of Our closest friend . )
It was by far a great open trial .
And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice .
And We preserved his virtuous remembrance ( praise ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Ibrahim ( Abraham ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely he was of Our servants with ( perfect faith ) .
And ( after Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) We gave him the good news of Ishaq ( Isaac ) . He was ( also ) a Prophet , one of the most pious .
And We bestowed blessings on him and on Ishaq ( Isaac ) . And among their descendants are both the virtuous as well as those who expressly wrong themselves .
And surely We blessed Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) as well with Our favours .
And We delivered them and their people from the ordeal .
And We helped them , so it was they who overmastered .
And We gave both of them the clear and enlightening Book ( the Torah ) .
And We guided them both to the straight path .
And We preserved their virtuous remembrance ( also ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely both of them were of Our servants blessed with ( perfect faith ) .
And indeed Ilyas ( Elias too ) was one of the Messengers .
When he said to his people : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Do you worship ( the idol named ) Bal and turn away from the Best of creators .
Allah , Who is your Lord and the Lord of your foregoing ancestors ( as well ) ?
So they ( i . e . the people of Baalbak ) rejected Ilyas ( Elias ) , so they will ( also ) be brought ( to the torment of Hell ) .
Except the chosen servants of Allah .
And We preserved his virtuous remembrance ( also ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Ilyas ( Elias ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely he was of Our servants blessed with ( perfect faith ) .
And verily Lut ( Lot too ) was one of the Messengers .
When We delivered him and the whole of his family .
Except that old woman who was of those who stayed behind .
Then We destroyed the others .
And surely you pass by ( their ruined towns while going from Makka to Syria ) in the morning .
And at night as well . Do you not even then understand ?
And Yunus ( Jonah too ) was indeed one of the Messengers .
When he ran towards the full boat .
Then ( when it was caught into a whirlpool ) they cast lots and ( in the draws ) he came to be the loser ( i . e . his name was drawn and those in the boat threw him into the river ) .
Then the fish swallowed him and he was a ( self - condemning ) repentant .
Then if he had not been of those who glorify ( Allah ) .
He would have stayed in the belly ( of the fish ) till the Day when people will be resurrected ( from the graves ) .
Then We cast him onto a wide plain ( the beach ) while he was sick .
And We caused a creeping ( gourd ) plant to grow over him .
And We sent him towards ( the people of Nineveh on the land of Mosul , ) a population of a hundred thousand or more .
( Seeing the signs of torment , ) they believed . So We granted them prosperity for a time .
So ask these ( disbelievers of Makka ) : Are there daughters for your Lord and sons for them ?
Did We create the angels as females and were they present ( on the occasion ) ?
Listen ! They assuredly say ( this ) out of their fabrications .
That Allah has begotten children and surely they are liars .
Has He chosen daughters as compared to sons ? ( The creed of the disbelievers of Makka is being refuted in the language of their logic and mentality . )
What is the matter with you ? How do you judge ?
Do you not ponder ?
Do you have any clear proof ( to establish your philosophy and ideology ) ?
Produce your book if you are truthful .
And they have fabricated a blood relationship between Allah and the jinn ( as well ) , whereas the jinn know that they ( too ) will be made to appear ( before the Presence of Allah ) .
Holy is Allah , Transcendent of what they utter .
But the chosen and exalted servants of Allah ( do not say such things ; they are not among them ) .
So you and ( the idols ) which you worship .
You all cannot misguide ( anyone against Allah ) .
Except the one who is bound to fall into Hell .
( And the angels say : ) Everyone of us has an appointed station .
And surely we ourselves are those who remain standing in rows .
And surely we ourselves remain engaged in glorifying ( Allah ) .
And no doubt these people used to say .
If we ( too ) had some ( Book ) of direction and guidance from the bygone people .
Then certainly we ( too ) would have been Allahs exalted servants .
But ( now ) they have rejected this ( Quran ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
And verily Our Command has been put into effect in respect of the servants whom We sent ( i . e . the Messengers ) .
That it is they who have been granted help .
And that essentially it is only Our army that is going to dominate .
So turn your attention away from them for a time .
And keep watching them ( constantly ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
And do they want Our punishment to be hastened ?
But when that ( torment ) descends before them , how evil will be the morning of those who were warned !
So turn your attention away from them for a while .
And keep watching them ( constantly ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
Holy is your Lord , the Lord of Honour , Transcendent of these ( things ) which they utter .
And peace be upon ( all ) the Messengers !
And all praise be to Allah alone , the Lord of all the worlds .
Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) By the Holy Quran , full of direction and guidance .
But the disbelievers are in ( the trouble of undue and unjust ) conceit and arrogance , ( suffering from ) opposition and enmity ( against Our Esteemed Prophet ) .
How many a community We have destroyed before them ! And they started crying ( on seeing the torment ) , when there was no time left for deliverance ( and release ) .
And they wondered that a Warner had come to them from among themselves and the disbelievers said : He is a magician , a great liar .
Has he turned all the gods into one God ? That is indeed a very strange thing !
And their chiefs ( stood up terminating their meeting with the Holy Prophet at Abu Talibs house ) and walked out saying ( to the rest of the people ) : You also walk out and be firm - footed in ( worshipping ) your gods . There is for sure some motive ( and purpose ) behind it .
We have not heard of this ( belief in the Oneness of God ) even among the last community ( of Christianity or the religion of Quraysh ) . This is but a fabricated lie .
Has this Admonition ( the Quran ) been sent down to him alone out of all of us ? To be more precise , they are ( caught ) in doubt about My Admonition . But in truth they have not yet tasted My torment .
Do they have the treasures of the Mercy of your Lord , Who is Almighty , the Most Benevolent ?
Or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? ( If so , ) then they should tie up ropes and climb up ( to heaven ) .
They are just a worthless army of the armies ( of the disbelievers ) that is about to be badly defeated at this very place .
Before them the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and Ad and ( also ) Pharaoh , the powerful king ( who tortured with stakes ) , belied and disbelieved .
And Thamud and the people of Lut ( Lot ) and the dwellers of ( the Wood ) al - Aika ( i . e . the people of Shuaib ) too ( denied ) . These were the large armies .
Each ( one of these ) people rejected the Messengers and My torment became inevitable ( for them ) .
And all of them are waiting for a single Mighty Blast ( Shout ) in which there will be no deferment .
And they say : O our Lord , give us hastily our share even before the Day of Reckoning .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Continue observing patience with what they say and remember Our servant Dawud ( David ) , who had great power . Certainly he was ever - turning ( to Us in repentance ) .
Indeed We put mountains under his command which ( joining him ) used to glorify Me evening and morning .
And the birds also that used to flock ( in his presence ) , each would turn towards him ( seeking to obey his commands ) .
And We strengthened and stabilized his state and regime , and blessed him with wisdom , insight and a decisive ( and distinctive ) oratory .
And has the news of the contenders reached you when they jumped over the wall and entered the chamber of worship ( of Dawud [ David ] ) ?
When they came inside to Dawud ( David ) , he felt nervous . They said : Do not feel upset . We are two parties in a dispute . One of us has wronged the other . So judge between us with truth and justice , and do not exceed limits , and lead us towards the right path .
Surely , he is my brother ; he has ninety - nine ewes and I have only one ewe . Yet he says : Give it ( also ) to me , and he suppresses me in conversation ( as well ) .
Dawud ( David ) said : He has done you a wrong in demanding your ewe to add to his own ewes , and it is true that most of the partners wrong one another except those who believe and do pious deeds , and such people are very few . And it occurred to Dawud ( David ) that We had put him to trial ( through that dispute ) . So he prayed for forgiveness from his Lord and fell down prostrate and turned ( to Allah ) in repentance .
So We granted him forgiveness and surely he enjoys special nearness in Our Presence and an exalted position ( in the Hereafter ) .
O Dawud ( David ) ! Verily We have made you ( Our ) vicegerent in the earth . So judge between the people ( or rule ) with Truth and Justice . And do not follow your desire or ( this following the desire ) shall turn you away from the path of Allah . Surely those who turn away from the path of Allah , for them is severe punishment because they forget the Day of Reckoning .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without any purpose and good reason . It is the view and concept of the disbelievers ( that this is a purposeless creation that came about by chance ) . So for disbelievers there is torment of the Fire of Hell .
Shall We make those who have believed and do constructive works like those who corrupt the earth with destructive works , or shall We make the pious like the wicked ?
This is a Blessed Book that We have revealed to you so that the wise may ponder over its Verses and seek direction and guidance .
And We blessed Dawud ( David ) with ( a son ) Sulaiman ( Solomon ) . How excellent a servant was he ! He is indeed oft - returning to Allah in repentance .
When swift horses of fine breed were presented to him in the evening .
He said ( remorsefully ) : I have committed love for wealth ( i . e . horses ) more than the love for the remembrance of my Lord until ( the sun ) disappeared behind the veil ( of night ) .
He said : Bring them ( horses ) back to me . So he cut away their legs and necks ( with a sword and thus he slaughtered his love for a position of nearness to Allah ) .
And indeed We put Sulaiman ( Solomon also ) to trial and placed an ( unusually created ) body on his throne . Then he regained ( the regime ) .
He submitted : O my Lord , forgive me and bestow on me such a reign that no one may have after me . Surely You are Most Benevolent .
Then We caused the wind to obey him . It used to blow gently under his command wherever he would desire ( it ) to go .
And all the jinn ( and devils were also subdued to him ) and every architect and diver ( too ) .
And ( also ) other jinn bound in chains .
( Allah said : ) This is Our Bestowal . ( Whether you ) confer ( it ) on others or hold back ( to you ) , no account will be asked for ( in both the cases ) .
And surely he enjoys exclusive nearness in Our Presence and an exalted position in the Hereafter .
And mention Our servant Ayyub ( Job ) when he cried to his Lord : Satan has afflicted me with great torture and suffering .
( Allah said : ) Strike the ground with your foot . Here is a spring ( of cool water ) to bathe and drink .
And We gave him his family and as many more ( members of family ) along with them , as a special Mercy from Us and as advice for the wise .
( O Ayyub [ Job ] ! ) Take a broom of ( hundred ) twigs in your hand and strike ( your wife once ) with that ( to fulfil your oath ) , and do not break your oath . Surely We found him steadfast . How excellent a servant was ( Ayyub [ Job ] ) ! Surely he was oft - returning ( to Us ) in repentance .
And mention Our servants Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) , who wielded great power and possessed vision .
Surely We chose them for an exclusive ( characteristic of ) the remembrance of the home in the Hereafter .
And verily in Our Sight they were of the chosen , exalted ( and ) most liked servants .
And ( also ) mention Ismail ( Ishmael ) and al - Yasa ( Isaaiah ) and Dhul - Kifl ( Ezekiel ) . All of them were of the chosen ones .
This is the direction and guidance ( which is cited in the first Verse of this Sura ) . And surely for the God - fearing there is a blessed abode .
( They are ) the Gardens of Eden to live in forever . Their doors will be opened for them .
There , reclining on cushions , they will be sitting ( on couches ) , calling ( at intervals ) for plenteous fine fruits and ( delicious ) drinks .
And beside them will be pure women ( houris ) with eyes downcast ( chastity conscious ) and of equal age .
These are the blessings which you are promised for the Day of Reckoning .
Surely this is Our provision which is never to exhaust .
This ( is for the believers ) , and surely for the defiant there is an extremely evil abode .
( That is ) Hell which they will enter and that is extremely evil bedding .
This ( is punishment ) ; so they should taste it : boiling water and pus .
And there is also a variety of ( torments of ) similar nature .
( The Guards of Hell or the inmates of Hell already there will say : ) This is an ( other ) army which is rushing into Hell along with you . There is no welcome for them . Surely they ( too ) are about to enter Hell .
They ( the arrivals ) will say : In fact it is you to whom may there be no reception ! It is but you who brought to us this ( disbelief and torment ) . So ( this ) is an evil resting place .
They will say : O our Lord , the one who brought for us this ( disbelief or torment ) , increase his torment in Hell twofold .
And they will say : What is the matter with us that we do not see ( those ) persons ( here ) we used to count among the evil people ?
Did we use to scoff at them ( unjustly ) or did our eyes miss ( to recognize ) them ? ( These were the sold - to - God souls like Ammar , Khubab , Suhaib , Bilal and Salman , may Allah be well pleased with all of them . )
Surely , this mutual dispute of the inmates of Hell is true .
Say : I am only a Warner and there is no God except Allah , the One , the All - Dominant .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and ( all ) what is between the two , Almighty , Most Forgiving .
Say : That ( Day of Rising ) is the tremendous piece of news .
You have turned your faces away from it .
I did not know of the Supreme Assembly ( of angels on my own ) when they were holding discussions ( about the creation of Adam ) .
The only Revelation that is sent to me ( from Allah ) is but I am a clear and straight Warner .
( Recall that occasion ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to create a human organism from ( moist ) clay .
Then when I perfect its ( visible body ) and blow into its ( invisible ) self My Own ( illumining ) spirit , fall down prostrate before him ( in his honour ) .
So all the angels fell down together prostrating themselves before him .
Except Iblis . He showed arrogance ( against the dignity of the Prophet ) and became one of the disbelievers .
( Allah ) said : O Iblis , what has prevented you from falling down prostrate before his ( Exalted Person ) whom I have created with My Own ( Benevolent ) Hand ? Did you show arrogance ( to him ) or were you ( presuming yourself ) high ranking ?
( Comparing himself with the Prophet , ) he said : I am better than he . You have created me from fire and You have created him from clay .
Allah said : So get out from here ( for the sin of insolence against the Prophet ) . Surely you are rejected .
And surely My curse is on you till the Day of Resurrection .
He said : O Lord , then give me respite ( to remain alive ) till the Day when they are raised alive from the graves .
Allah said : ( Be off , ) you are surely of those who are granted respite .
Till the Day of the time which is appointed ( and known ) .
He said : By Your Honour , I shall certainly turn all of them away from the straight path with persistence .
Except those of Your servants who are chosen and exalted ones .
Allah said : So the Truth is ( this ) , and the Truth I say .
That I will fill Hell with you and with all those who will follow your ( denigrating mindset ) .
Say : I do not ask you for any reward for this ( i . e . preaching of the Truth ) , nor am I of those who pretend .
This ( Quran ) is only direction and guidance for the whole world .
And you will yourselves come to know its Truth after a while .
The revelation of this Book is from Allah , the Lord of Honour , All - Wise .
Surely We have revealed ( this ) Book to you with the Truth . So worship Allah for His sake alone in sincere obedience .
( Say to the people : ) Listen , sincere obedience and worship is only Allahs due . And those ( disbelievers ) who have taken ( idols as ) helpers other than Allah ( say in false justification of their idol - worship : ) We worship them only that they may bring us near to Allah . Surely Allah will judge between them concerning the matter in which they differ . Certainly Allah does not give him guidance who is a liar , very ungrateful .
Had Allah willed to beget children ( for Himself ) , He would have chosen whom He liked out of His Creation . Glory be to Him , He is Allah , the One , the All - Dominant .
He created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy and planning . He causes the night to overlap the day and the day to overlap the night . And He is the One Who has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a system ) . Each ( star and planet ) rotates in its orbit till an appointed time . Beware ! He is the One Who is All - Dominant ( over the entire system ) , Most Forgiving .
He has created all of you from a single life cell , and then made from it a similar pair . And then He brought about for you eight living animals in pairs . He shapes you in the wombs of your mothers from one creative phase into the next in sequence and ( completes this process ) in three ( germinal ) layers . This is Allah , your Lord , to Whom belongs all Power and Authority . There is no God except He . Where then are you deviated ( and disoriented after knowing these concealed realities of Creation ) ?
If you disbelieve then surely Allah is Self - Sufficient and He does not like disbelief ( and ingratitude ) for His servants and if you give thanks , ( so ) He likes it for you . And no bearer of burden will bear the burden of any other . Then you have to return to your Lord . Then He will inform you of the deeds which you used to do . Surely He knows best ( even ) the secrets of the hearts .
And when some suffering afflicts man he turns towards his Lord and cries out . Then when ( Allah ) grants him some blessing from Himself , he forgets that ( suffering ) he used to beseech relief from . And ( then ) he sets up ( idols ) as partners with Allah to make ( others also ) lose His Way . Say : ( O disbeliever , ) profit a little ( worldly gain ) from your disbelief ; you are for sure of the inmates of Hell .
Well ! ( Is this polytheist better or ) that ( believer ) who worships during the hours of the night standing and in prostration , lives in fear of the Hereafter and expects Mercy from his Lord ? Say : Can those who have knowledge and those who do not have ( all ) be alike ? So only the wise do receive the admonition .
( O Beloved , say from My side : ) O My servants , you who have believed , adopt Godwariness ; it is for these men of spiritual excellence in this world that there is excellent reward . And Allahs earth is vast . So the steadfast will certainly be given their reward without measure .
Say : I have been commanded to worship Allah in sincerest obedience and devotion to Him alone .
And I was ( also ) commanded to become the first Muslim of all ( His Creation ) .
Say : If I disobeyed My Lord , I would fear the torment of a Terrible Day .
Say : I worship Allah alone making obedience purely for Him .
So worship what you like besides Allah . Say : Surely losers are only those who will bring loss to their own souls and their families on the Day of Resurrection . Remember ! That truly is the manifest loss .
For them there will be clouds of fire ( as covers ) over them and pavements of fire beneath them too . This is ( the torment ) with which Allah warns His servants . O My servants ! Always fear Me .
And those who remained intact from idol - worship and turned towards Allah , for them is good news . So give glad tidings to My servants .
Those who listen attentively to what is said , then follow the best in it , it is they whom Allah has given guidance and it is they who have wisdom .
Well , can you save him for whom the Command of torment has become due and who has become the inmate of Hell ( for ever ) ?
But for those who fear their Lord are lofty palaces ( in Paradise ) with lofty mansions built over and rivers flowing beneath . This is Allahs promise . Allah does not go against His promise .
( O man ! ) Have you not seen that Allah showered water from the sky , then made it sprout from the earth as water springs ? Then He brings forth with it crops of various colours . Then ( growing fully ) it dries up . Then , ( ripening , ) you see it turns yellow . Then He reduces it to broken straw . Surely there is advice in it for the wise .
Well , he whose breast Allah has opened for Islam is ( stationed ) in the light from his Lord . ( But on the contrary ) they whose hearts are hardened for ( being deprived of the Bounty of ) Allahs remembrance are destined to ruin . It is they who are in open error .
Allah is the One Who has sent down the best Word .
That is a Book whose contents are in harmony with one another ( in format and meaning ) and ( whose Verses ) are repeated frequently .
It sends a hair - raising shudder in the bodies of those who fear their Lord .
Then their skins and hearts get softened and they get ( lost ) into the Remembrance of Allah ( in a weeping mood ) .
It is guidance from Allah and He guides with it whom He wills .
And he whom Allah holds misguided ( i . e . leaves astray ) has no one to guide him .
Well , on the Day of Resurrection , ( what will be his plight ) who will be trying to halt the evil torment ( of the Fire ) with his face ( because both his hands will be fastened ) ? And it will be said to these wrongdoers : Taste the consequence of the evil deeds that you used to do .
The people who passed before them rejected ( the Messengers ) , so the torment came upon them from where they had no perception .
So Allah made them taste disgrace and humiliation ( here ) in this world and surely the torment of the Hereafter is far greater . Would that they knew !
And truly , ( to make the people understand , ) We have given every kind of example in this Quran in order that they may take advice .
The Quran is in the Arabic language ( which is the most comprehensive , lucid and communicative of all the languages ) in which there is not even a bit of crookedness so that they may adopt Godwariness .
Allah has given an example of such a ( slave ) person that is owned by many partners who are ill - mannered and mutually quarrelsome as well . And ( on the other side ) there is a person who is a slave only to one master . Can they both be alike ? ( Not at all ! ) All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know ( the Truth of the Oneness of Allah ) .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Surely you will pass away ( only to taste death ) but they will certainly die ( for everlasting death . So the difference between the two deaths will be worth seeing ) .
Then certainly on the Day of Resurrection you will dispute with one another in the Presence of your Lord . ( One party will say to the other : You stopped us from understanding the station of the Prophet and the glory of the Messenger . They will reply : No , you were yourselves ill - fated and misguided . )
So who is more unjust than he who invents lies against Allah and denies the Truth when it comes to him ? Is not the abode for disbelievers in Hell ?
And whoever has brought the Truth and he who has confirmed it , it is they who are Godfearing .
( All ) those ( favours ) which they will long for ( are in store ) for them with their Lord . This is the reward of those who are committed to ( piousness and ) spiritual excellence .
So that Allah may remove from them errors which they did and may grant them the reward for the pious deeds they used to do .
Is Allah not enough for His ( most intimate ) servant ( the Esteemed Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ? And these ( disbelievers ) frighten you , apart from Allah , with the idols ( which they worship ) . And there is no one to guide him whom Allah holds astray ( owing to his denial to believe the Truth ) .
And he whom Allah blesses with guidance , there is none to misguide him . Is Allah not Almighty , the Lord of Vengeance ?
And if you ask them : Who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will certainly say : Allah . Say : Well , state , can the idols that you worship besides Allah remove the suffering which Allah may intend to inflict upon me , or if Allah intends to grant me Mercy , can they ( idols ) stop that Mercy ( sent by Him ) ? Say : Allah is Sufficient for me . The trusting ones put their trust in Him alone .
Say : O ( my ) people ! Carry on working according to your way ; I am working ( according to my way ) . Then you will soon know ( the end ) .
( That ) who it is upon whom comes the torment which will disgrace him . And everlasting torment will come down upon him .
Surely , We revealed the Book to you with the Truth for ( the guidance of ) people . So he who takes guidance takes for his own benefit , and he who goes astray , so he strays to his own detriment . And you are not responsible for them .
Allah takes away souls at the time of their death and those whose death has not yet arrived during their sleep . Then He withholds those souls whose death He has ordained and sets other ( souls ) free till an appointed time . Surely in it are Signs for those who contemplate .
Have they taken ( idols as ) intercessors against Allahs leave ? Say : Even though they do not own anything , nor do they have any reason ?
Say : ( The leave for ) all intercession rests with Allah alone ( which He has specified for His intimate servants ) . The Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth also belongs to Him alone . Then to Him you will be returned .
And when solely Allah is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter constrict and recoil with disgust , and when the idols ( that they worship ) are mentioned apart from Allah , they rejoice all of a sudden .
Submit : O Allah ! Originator of the heavens and the earth ! Knower of the unseen and the seen ! You alone will judge between Your servants those ( matters ) in which they used to disagree .
And if the wrongdoers possessed all ( the wealth and assets ) that are on earth and ( obtained ) the same again in addition , they would ransom themselves with it ( for deliverance ) from the evil torment on the Day of Resurrection . But there shall appear to them from Allah such a torment as they could never have even imagined .
And there will appear to them ( all ) the evildoings which they have earned , and that ( torment ) will encompass them which they used to laugh at .
When some suffering touches man , he cries to Us . But when We grant him some favour from Us he starts saying : This favour has come to me on ( the basis of my own ) knowledge and planning . In fact it is a trial but most of them do not know .
In truth those who have passed away before them also used to say the same ( things ) . So whatever they earned could not benefit them .
And the evil deeds which they had done fell upon them , and those of them who are engaged in doing wrongs their evil works will ( also ) catch up with them soon that they have earned , and they cannot prevent ( Allah ) .
And do they not know that Allah gives abundantly to whom He wills and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) ? Surely in that are Signs for those who ( truly ) believe .
Say : O servants of Mine who have wronged their souls , do not lose hope of Allahs Mercy . Assuredly , Allah forgives all sins ( and excesses ) . He is certainly Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And turn to your Lord in repentance and total submission and become thoroughly obedient to Him before the torment comes upon you . Then you will not be helped at all .
And follow the Excellent ( Book ) that has been revealed to you by your Lord before the torment suddenly comes upon you and you are simply unaware .
( Lest ) someone should say : Alas ! Grief on my lapse and omission in respect of my duty ( of obedience ) to Allah and I was certainly among those who mocked .
Or should say : If Allah had given me guidance , I would certainly have been of the righteous .
Or should say on seeing the torment : Could I return to the world but only once , I would then become one among the pious .
( The Lord will say : ) Yes , no doubt , My Revelations came to you . So you rejected them and showed arrogance and became one of the disbelievers .
And those who have fabricated a lie against Allah you will see them on the Day of Resurrection that their faces are turned black . Is the abode of the arrogant not in Hell ?
And those who have adopted Godwariness Allah will deliver them bestowing success on them . No evil will touch them , nor will they grieve at all .
Allah is the Creator of everything and He is Ever - Watchful over everything .
To Him alone belong the keys of the heavens and the earth and those who disbelieve in the Revelations of Allah , it is they who are the losers .
Say : O you ignoramuses , do you ask me to worship someone other than Allah ?
And in truth ( this ) revelation has been sent to you and to those ( Messengers as well ) who were ( raised ) before you : ( O man , ) if you associate partners with Allah then all your works will go to waste and you will certainly be among the losers .
So , worship Allah and be among the thankful .
And they did not realize true appreciation and veneration of Allahs Glory as the appreciation and veneration of His Glory was due . And the whole earth will be in His grip on the Day of Resurrection and all the heavenly spheres will be rolled up in His right hand ( i . e . firm hold of His Might ) . Holy is He and High and Exalted above all what they associate with him .
And the Trumpet will be blown . Then all the people that are in the heavens and that are in the earth will become senseless except him whom Allah wills . Then the Trumpet will be blown again ; so they will stand up gazing all at once .
And the earth ( on the Day of Judgment ) will be illumined with the Light of its Lord and the Book ( of everyones deeds ) will be laid down . And the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought and judgment will be given between the people with truth and justice . And they will not be done any wrong .
And everyone will be given recompense in full for his doings and He Knows full well what they do .
And those who have disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups until , when they approach it ( Hell ) , its gates will be opened and its keepers will say to them : Did Messengers not come to you from among yourselves who recited to you the Verses of your Lord and warned you of this Days appearance ? They ( the inmates of Hell ) will say : Yes , ( they came ) . But the command of torment would have been carried out against the disbelievers .
It will be said to them : Enter the gates of Hell . ( You ) will live in it for ever . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
And those who persisted in fear of Allah will ( also ) be conducted to Paradise in groups , until when they approach it ( Paradise ) , its doors will have been opened for them ( well before ) and the keepers of Paradise will say ( greeting them ) : Peace be upon you ! Be you glad and rejoicing , so enter it to live here forever .
And they ( the residents of Paradise ) will say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has fulfilled His promise to us and has made us inheritors of the land of Paradise that we may reside in ( this ) Paradise wherever we desire . So how excellent is the reward of those who put piousness to work !
And , ( O Beloved , ) you will see the angels all around the Throne in circles glorifying the Lord with His praise and the judgment will be given among ( all ) the people with the truth and justice and it will be announced : All praise belongs to Allah alone , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Ha , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The Revelation of this Book is from Allah , Almighty , All - Knowing .
The Forgiver of sin , the Acceptor of repentance , the Severe in tormenting , the Lord of Bounty ; there is no God but He ; towards Him have ( all ) to return .
No one disputes about the Revelations of Allah except those who do not believe . So let not their moving about ( freely ) in the cities delude you .
Before them the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and after them many ( other ) communities rejected ( their Messengers ) . And every people intended to seize its Messenger ( to assassinate or imprison him ) and raised dispute through baseless issues to dilute ( the influence of ) the Truth by means of that ( dispute ) . So I seized them ( in torment ) . So how was ( My ) torment !
That is how the judgment of your Lord was fulfilled against those who disbelieved . Surely they are the inmates of Hell .
The angels who are bearing the Throne and those who are around it , ( all ) glorify their Lord with His praise and believe in Him and pray for forgiveness of the believers ( and submit ) : O our Lord , You encompass everything in ( Your ) Mercy and Knowledge . So forgive those who turn to You in repentance and follow Your path and protect them from the torment of Hell .
O our Lord ! And admit them to the Gardens of Eden ( for eternal living ) You have promised them . And ( with them admit also ) the pious ones of their fathers and their wives and their children . Surely You are Almighty , Most Wise .
And save them from ( the punishment of ) sins . And the one You saved from ( the punishment of ) sins that Day , You have indeed shown him great Mercy . And that is great success indeed .
Surely the disbelievers will be called out and addressed : ( Today ) Allahs displeasure with you is greater than your own disgust for yourselves while you used to deny when called to believe .
They will say : O our Lord , You have caused us to die twice and You have ( also ) given us life twice . ( Now ) we confess our sins . So is there any way out ( to escape from this chastisement ) ?
( It will be said to them : No , ) this ( eternal punishment ) is due to the reason that when solely Allah was called upon you used to deny , but when ( something ) was associated with Him , you used to believe . So ( now ) the Command is Allahs alone , Who is Most High , Supreme .
He is the One Who shows you His Signs and sends down sustenance for you from the heaven . And only he who remains inclined ( to Allah alone ) accepts advice .
So worship Allah for His own sake in sincere obedience and true devotion , even though the disbelievers may despise it .
The Exalter of Ranks and the Owner of the Mighty Throne , He sends His Spirit ( i . e . Revelation ) upon whoever of His servants He wills by His Command , so that He may warn them ( people ) of the Day of Assembly .
The Day when they all will come forth ( from the graves ) , and nothing of their ( deeds ) will remain hidden from Allah . ( Allah will say : ) Whose is the Kingdom this Day ? ( It will be further added : ) It belongs to Allah , the One , the Most Dominant .
Today every soul will be rewarded for what it has earned . There will be no injustice Today . Surely Allah is Swift in taking an account .
And warn them of the Day of impending calamity when hearts will rise to throats due to the suppressed grief . The wrongdoers will have neither any kind friend nor any influential intercessor .
He knows the treacherous eyes and also those secrets which the breasts hide ( inside them ) .
And Allah judges with truth , and the ( idols ) they worship other than Allah can judge nothing at all . Surely Allah is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And have they not travelled in the land so that they could see what was the end of those who were before them ? They were far mightier in power than these and ( also ) greater in their remains and signs ( which they left behind ) in the earth . Then Allah seized them for their sins and there was none to protect them from ( the torment of ) Allah .
That was because their Messengers brought them open Signs but they denied . So Allah seized them ( in the torment ) . Surely He is All - Powerful , Most Severe in punishing .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs and clear authority .
Towards Pharaoh , Haman and Qarun but they said : He is a sorcerer , a great liar .
Then when he came to them with the message of Truth from Us , they said : Kill the sons of those who have believed with him but leave their women alive . And the treacherous plots of the disbelievers were nothing but ruination .
And Pharaoh said : Leave me to kill Musa ( Moses ) and let him call his Lord . I fear he will change your religion or will spread violence in the country ( Egypt ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : I have taken refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant character who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning .
And a believing man from among the people of Pharaoh who had kept his faith secret said , Do you kill a man ( just ) because he says : Allah is my Lord ? And he has brought you clear Signs from your Lord .
And if ( suppose ) he is a liar then the burden of his lie will fall back on him alone , but if he is truthful then as much torment is bound to seize you as he has promised you .
Surely Allah does not give guidance to someone who exceeds limits and is a downright liar .
O my people ! You are in power today ; ( it is you who ) are ruling over the land ( of Egypt ) . But who can save us from the torment of Allah if that ( torment ) comes upon us ? Pharaoh said : I instruct you only what I myself deem ( correct ) , and I do not show you ( any path ) except the path of righteousness .
And he who had embraced faith said : O my people , I fear ( the torment of ) an evil day coming upon you ( too ) like the day that seized ( the former ) generations .
On the pattern of the punishment of the People of Nuh ( Noah ) , Ad and Thamud and the later communities . And Allah does not intend any injustice to ( His ) servants .
And , O people , I fear for you a Day of hue and cry ( i . e . the Day of Rising ) .
The Day when you will turn your backs and flee away and there will be no one to save you from ( the torment of ) Allah and for him whom Allah holds astray there is no guide or leader .
And , ( O people of Egypt , ) no doubt Yusuf ( Joseph ) came to you with clear Signs before this . And you always remained doubtful about those ( Signs ) which he brought to you until when he passed away , you started saying : Now Allah will never send any Messenger after him . In like manner Allah holds one astray who is a transgressor and a sceptic .
Those who argue about the Revelations of Allah without any proof that has come to them , ( their argumentation ) is awfully displeasing in the sight of Allah and in the sight of believers . That is how Allah seals up the heart of every arrogant ( and ) tyrant .
And Pharaoh said : O Haman , build me a towering palace so that ( climbing it ) I may reach the tracts .
The tracts to the heavens ; then I may peep and glance at the God of Musa ( Moses ) ; and I consider him but a liar . And in this way the evil conduct of Pharaoh was made charming for him and he was hindered from the path ( of Allah ) . And the treacherous plan of Pharaoh was merely a catastrophe .
And the man who had believed said : O my people , follow me , I will lead you to the path of guidance and piousness .
O my people ! The life of this world is nothing but ( a few days ) gain and the Hereafter is certainly a home to live in forever .
He who commits evil will not be rewarded but with the same measure . And whoever behaves piously , whether male or female , and is a believer as well , it is they who will enter Paradise . There they will be given sustenance without measure .
And , O my people , what has happened to me that I call you to salvation and you call me to Hell ?
You invite me to deny Allah and associate with Him that of which I have no knowledge , while I invite you to the Almighty God Who is Most Forgiving .
The Truth is that what you are calling me to is not worth calling either in this world or in the Hereafter . And surely our return is to Allah alone , and certainly those who transgress are the inmates of Hell .
So you will soon recall ( these words ) that I am saying to you . And I consign my affair to Allah . Surely Allah is Ever - Watchful of the servants .
Then Allah safeguarded him against their evils which they were planning . And an evil torment engulfed the people of Pharaoh .
They are brought before the Fire of Hell morning and evening . And the Day when Resurrection occurs ( a Voice will command : ) Cast the people of Pharaoh into the most miserable chastisement .
And when they will fall out with one another in Hell , the weak will say to those who used to show arrogance ( in the world ) : We were your followers , so can you remove from us ( even ) a portion of the Fire of Hell ?
Those who practised arrogance will say : We all are doomed in the same Hell ; surely Allah has given His final judgment among the servants .
And those burning in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell : Pray to your Lord that He may lessen our torment some day .
They will say : Did your Messengers not come to you with clear Signs ? They will reply : Yes , of course . ( Then the keepers ) will say : So pray yourselves . But the disbelievers prayer will ( always ) be in vain .
Surely We help Our Messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and ( will also help ) on the Day when the witnesses will rise .
The Day when the excuse of the wrongdoers will not benefit them . And there will be curse on them , and for them will be the evil home ( in Hell ) .
And verily We gave Musa ( [ Moses ] the Book ) of guidance and ( after him ) We made the Children of Israel the inheritors of that ( Book ) .
Guidance and a Reminder for those who possess wisdom .
So keep patience . Assuredly the Promise of Allah is true . And ask forgiveness for the sins of your Umma ( Community ) and glorify your Lord with His praise in the evening and in the morning .
Surely those who argue about the Revelations of Allah without any authority having come to them , there is nothing in their breasts except vain superiority ; they will never be able to attain to that ( true superiority ) . So keep seeking refuge with Allah ( from their evil ) . Surely He alone is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is far greater than the creation of mankind but most people do not know .
And the blind and the seeing cannot be equal . So ( in the same way ) those who believe and do righteous works and the evildoers too cannot be ( alike ) . You accept direction and guidance but little .
Surely the Last Hour is bound to come . There is no doubt in that . Yet most people do not believe .
And your Lord has said : Always pray to Me ; I shall certainly grant your prayer . Surely those who turn away from My worship in defiance will soon enter Hell disgraced .
Allah is the One Who has made the night for you to repose in and brightened the day to see ; surely Allah is Bountiful to mankind but most people do not give thanks .
That is Allah , your Lord , Who is the Creator of everything . There is no God apart from Him . So where are you wandering disorientated ?
Likewise were wandering distracted those who used to deny the Revelations of Allah .
Allah is the One Who made the earth a dwelling place for you and the heaven a ceiling and gave you form and features and then perfected your shapes and granted you sustenance of pure things . Such is Allah , your Lord . So Blessed is Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
He is the Ever - Living . There is no God but He . So worship Him making obedience and devotion sincerely His . All praise belongs to Allah alone , the Lord of all the worlds .
Say : I have been forbidden to worship those idols that you worship apart from Allah whereas manifest Signs have come to me from my Lord and I have been commanded to obey the Lord of all the worlds .
He is the One Who initiated ( the genesis of ) your ( chemical life ) from clay , then ( your biological genesis ) from a sperm drop ( zygote ) , then from a hanging mass ( in the mothers womb ) . Then ( eventually ) He is the One Who brings you forth as an infant then ( nourishes you ) , so that you may reach your maturity . ( Then He grants you a period of life , ) so that you may grow old . And some of you die early ( before senility ) . And ( the purpose of all this is ) that you may complete your respective appointed terms and ( also ) that you may comprehend .
He is the One Who gives life and causes death . Then when He decides upon a thing He says to it only : Be , so it becomes .
Have you not seen those who argue about the Revelations of Allah ? Where are they straying ?
Those who have rejected the Book ( as well as ) the Signs with which We sent Our Messengers , they will know ( their end ) soon .
When they have iron collars round their necks and chains , and they will be dragged away .
Into the boiling water and then will be thrown into the Fire as fuel .
Then it will be said to them : Where are those ( idols ) which you used to set up as partners .
Apart from Allah ? They will say : They have been lost from us . In fact we never worshipped anything before . That is how Allah holds the disbelievers astray .
This ( punishment ) is the requital of your undue rejoicing in the earth and the recompense of your gloating .
Enter the gates of Hell . You will live in it forever . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
So keep patience . Surely Allahs promise is true . Then whether We show you a portion of that ( torment ) which We have promised them or make you depart from visible life before that , ( in both cases ) they will be returned to Us .
And no doubt We sent many Messengers before you . We have given you an account of some of them while We have not ( yet ) narrated to you the annals of some others . And it was not possible for any Messenger to bring any Sign without Allahs leave . Then when the command of Allah came ( and ) the judgment was given with truth and justice the exponents of evil went into loss .
Allah is the One Who has created cattle for you so that you may ride some of them and some of them you eat .
And in them are for you other benefits too . So you may ride them ( further ) to reach that desired ( place ) which is ( determined ) in your hearts , and ( that ) you are borne on them and the boats .
And He shows you ( many of ) His Signs . So which of Allahs Signs will you deny ?
So have they not travelled in the earth that they could see how they met their fate who passed before them ? They were far greater ( in number ) than these people and mightier in power and ( much more advanced ) in respect of the remains and traces ( as well ) that ( they ) have left behind in the earth . But whatever they used to earn brought them no benefit .
So when their Messengers came to them with manifest Signs , they kept rejoicing in the pride of ( the worldly ) knowledge and skill they possessed . And ( in the same state ) that torment engulfed them which they used to mock .
But when they saw Our torment they started saying : We believe in Allah , the One , and reject ( all ) those we used to associate with Him as partners .
Then their acceptance of faith could not profit them at all while they had seen Our torment . That is Allahs pattern which has ever been in practice in respect of His servants and the disbelievers always suffered heavy loss at this juncture .
Ha - Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
( It is ) sent down from the Most Kind ( Lord ) , Ever - Merciful .
A Book whose Signs are expounded in detail , the Quran , in the Arabic ( language ) for a people who possess knowledge and wisdom .
A Bearer of good news and a Warner . Then most of them turned away . So they do not listen ( to it ) .
And they say : Our hearts are in covers against that to which you call us , and in our ears is heaviness ( of deafness ) , and between us and you is a barrier . So you keep doing ( your ) work and we do our work .
( To remove their barrier and to inspire them to listen , ) say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Well , being a human being outwardly , I am like you . ( Then why are you so averse to me and my call ? ) This Revelation has been sent down to me that your God is One God , so be straight turned towards Him alone and seek forgiveness from Him . And destruction awaits those who associate partners with Him .
Those who do not pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , and it is they who deny the Hereafter as well .
Surely those who believe and do righteous works persistently , for them is endless reward .
Say : Do you deny Him ( Allah ) Who created the earth in two days ( i . e . two time - lengths ) , and set up peers with Him ? He is the One Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
And He placed over it heavy mountains ( brought forth ) from within it and treasured in it ( His infinite ) blessings ( minerals , water reservoirs , natural resources , and other substances and forces and energies ) and provided and appointed in it sustenance ( i . e . necessities of life for all the creatures . He ) accomplished ( all that ) in four days ( i . e . four evolutionary periods . All this sustenance is in fact ) equal for all seekers ( and the needy ) .
Then He turned towards the heavenly universe that was ( all ) smoke . So He said to it ( the heavenly spheres ) and the earth : Get in ( compliance with Our system ) either under the influence of mutual attraction and coordination or under aversion and revulsion . Both said : We submit with pleasure .
Then He made seven heavens in two days ( i . e . two phases ) and endued every heavenly universe with its ( built - in ) system . And We adorned the lower heaven with lamps ( i . e . stars and planets ) and made it secure as well ( so that the system of one may not interfere with the other ) . This is the system programmed by the Lord of Absolute Dominance ( and Might ) , the All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
Then if they turn away , say : I warn you of that terrible torment like the destruction of Ad and Thamud .
When the Messengers came to them from their front and from their rear ( or before them and after them and said : ) Worship none but Allah , they said : Had our Lord willed He would have sent down angels . So we deny whatever you have been sent with .
As for the people of Ad , they were unrightfully arrogant ( and rebellious ) in the land and said : Who is greater in might than we are ? And have they not seen that Allah , Who has created them , is far mightier in power than they are ? And they kept denying Our Revelations .
So We sent upon them an appalling violent wind during ill - omened days to make them taste the torment of humiliation in the worldly life and the torment of the Hereafter will be far more degrading . And they will not be helped at all .
And as for the people of Thamud , We showed them the path of guidance , but they preferred blindness to Guidance . So a blast of humiliating devastation seized them for the deeds that they used to earn .
And We delivered those who believed and always put to work piety ( and self - protecton ) .
And the Day when the enemies of Allah will be gathered and driven to Hell , they will be impeded ( shepherded ) and driven ( forcefully ) .
Until when they reach Hell , their ears , their eyes and their skins will bear witness against them concerning the works that they use to do .
Then they will say to their skins : Why did you bear witness against us ? They will say : Allah , Who gives speech to everything , has enabled us to speak . And He is the One Who created you the first time and you will be returned to Him alone .
( While committing the sin ) you did not take any cover even against this ( fear ) that your ears would bear witness against you and ( that ) your eyes and ( that ) your skins ( might even bear witness ) , but you imagined that even Allah did not know many of the deeds that you do .
And it is this notion that you developed about your Lord which ruined you . So you became of the losers .
Now even if they keep patience , their abode is Hell ; and if they seek to earn ( Allahs ) pleasure ( by turning to Him in repentance ) , even then they will not be among those who attain to Allahs pleasure .
And We appointed for them companions ( Satans ) . So they made ( all those deeds ) fascinating to them which were in their front and in their rear . And the same command of torment proved true against them that had gone forth against the communities of jinn and mankind that had passed before them . Surely they were the losers .
And the disbelievers say : Do not listen to this Quran but make noises in ( its recitation sessions ) so that you may overwhelm ( their recitation from the Quran ) .
So We will most certainly make the disbelievers taste the severe torment , and will most certainly requite them for the evil deeds which they used to do .
This Hell is the recompense of the enemies of Allah . There is a home in it for them to live in forever a requital for their denial of Our Revelations .
And those who disbelieved will say : O our Lord , show us those of the jinn and men who led us astray so that we may ( crush ) them under our feet and so that they may become of the most humiliated ones .
Surely those who say : Our Lord is Allah , then stick to it ( firmly ) , angels descend upon them ( and say : ) Do not fear nor grieve and rejoice in the Paradise that you were promised .
We are your friends and helpers in the life of this world and in the Hereafter ( too ) . And there is for you every blessing that you long for . And all those things are ( available ) for you there that you ask for .
( This ) is an entertainment from Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful ( Lord ) .
And who can be more pleasing in speech than one who calls towards Allah and does pious work and says : Surely I am of the obedient servants ( of Allah and the Holy Prophet ) ?
And good and evil cannot be equal . And remove the evil in a better ( way ) with the result that he between whom and you was rivalry before becomes your most warmhearted friend .
And this ( virtue ) is granted only to those who observe patience . And only he acquires this ( capability ) who is blessed with a large share of Bounty .
And , ( O Believing Servant , ) if an evil whisper of Satan stirs your mind seek refuge with Allah ; surely He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And of His Signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon . So prostrate yourselves neither before the sun nor before the moon . But fall down in prostration only before Allah , Who has created them ( all ) if He is the One Whom you worship .
Then if they show arrogance ( do not care for them ) . So the angels that are in the Presence of your Lord glorify Him night and day , and never are they tired ( and disgruntled ) .
And of His Signs is also that you ( first ) see the earth dry ( and worthless ) , but when We rain water on it , it becomes green and fresh and brings forth vegetation . Surely He Who has brought this ( dead earth ) to life again certainly He is the One Who will give life to the dead ( on the Day of Resurrection ) . Surely He has Absolute Power over everything .
Verily those who turn away from the straight path with regard to ( the meanings of ) Our Verses are not hidden from Us . Then , is he better who is thrown into the Fire of Hell or someone who comes safe and secure ( from the torment ) on the Day of Resurrection ? Do as you wish . Surely He sees all that you do .
Indeed those who disbelieved in the Quran when it had come to them , ( that is their ill fortune ) . And surely it ( the Quran ) is a Mighty Venerable Book .
Falsehood can approach it ( the Quran ) neither from before nor from behind . ( It ) has been sent down by the Most Wise , the Most Praiseworthy ( Lord ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Whatever is said to you are the same Words that have been said to the Messengers before you . Surely your Lord is Most Forgiving and the Master of agonizing chastisement ( as well ) .
And if We had revealed this ( Book ) as a Quran in a non - Arabic language , they would certainly have said : Why have its verses not been expounded expressly ? Is the Book non - Arabic and the Prophet an Arab ? ( So , O Esteemed Beloved , We have revealed the Quran also in your language . ) Say : That ( Quran ) is Guidance as well as Healing for the believers but those who do not believe , their ears are heavy with deafness and that is blindness ( as well ) in their case , ( as if ) they are like men called from afar .
And verily We gave the Book to Musa ( Moses ) but disagreement was perpetrated in that ( too ) . And had not a Command already been given by your Lord , the matter would have been judged between them . And surely they are ( suffering from ) a deceitful doubt about this ( the Quran as well ) .
Whoever does pious work does it for ( the benefit ) of his own self , and whoever commits sin its ( resultant evil suffering ) will fall back on him alone . And your Lord is not at all unjust to His servants .
The knowledge of the Hour of Resurrection is referred to Him ( Allah ) alone . And no fruits come out of their sheath nor does a female conceive or give birth to a child but ( all this ) is in His knowledge . And the Day when He will call out to them : Where are My partners ? they ( the polytheists ) will say : We submit that none of us is a witness ( to anyone being Your partner ) .
All those ( idols ) that they used to worship will disappear from them . And they will make out that they are not left with any way to escape .
Man does not tire of praying for good and if an evil touches him he loses all hope becomes a pessimist .
And if We give Him a taste of Mercy from Us after that misery which touched him , he surely starts saying : This is my privilege . And I do not think that the Last Hour will ever take place . And if at all I am returned to my Lord even then there will surely be good fortune for me in His Presence . So We will certainly inform the disbelievers of the deeds which they did and We shall indeed make them taste the most severe torment .
And when We bestow a favour upon man he turns his face away and , keeping withdrawn , strides far from Us . And when distress touches him he entreats lengthy prayers .
Say : Well , give your view , if this ( Quran ) is really ( sent down ) from Allah and you keep denying it , then who is more astray than he who is ( engaged ) in extreme opposition ?
We will soon show them Our Signs all around the world and in their own selves , until it dawns upon them that indeed this is the Truth . Is your Lord not Sufficient ( to confirm your Trueness ) , for He alone is ( also ) witness to everything ?
Beware that they are in doubt about the Meeting with their Lord . Beware ! He is the One Who encompasses everything ( with His Knowledge and Power ) .
Ha - Mim .
Ain , Sin , Qaf . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
In like manner has Allah Almighty , All - Wise been sending His Revelations to you and to those ( Messengers ) who have passed before you .
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth and He is Most High , Most Great .
The heavenly spheres are nearly rent asunder from above them . And the angels keep glorifying their Lord with His praise and begging for forgiveness for those on the earth . Remember ! Allah alone is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And those who have taken idols instead of Allah as their protectors and guardians , Allah is Ever - Watchful over their ( affairs ) . And you are not responsible for them ( the disbelievers ) .
And likewise We have revealed to you the Holy Quran in the Arabic language so that you may warn the residents of Makka and its suburbs and that you may warn them of the Day of Assembly about which there is no doubt . ( On that Day ) one party will be in Paradise and the other in Hell .
And had Allah so willed , He would have made all of them a single community . But He admits to His Mercy whom He likes . And for the wrongdoers there will be no protector or guardian .
Have they taken idols as their guardians instead of Allah ? So Allah alone is the Guardian . ( And only His friends are Awliya . ) And He alone gives life to the dead , and He alone is Most Powerful over everything .
And the decision of the matter in which you differ rests only with Allah . That is Allah , my Lord . In Him I put my trust , and to Him alone I turn .
He has brought into existence the heavens and the earth from nothingness . He is the One Who made pairs for you from your own kind and made pairs of cattle as well and with this ( pair strategy ) He multiplies and spreads you . There is nothing like Him and He alone is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . He opens His treasures to whom He wills ) . He grants sustenance abundantly to whom He likes and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) . Surely He knows everything best .
He has prescribed for you the same path of Din ( Religion ) which He enjoined on Nuh ( Noah ) and which We have revealed to you , and which We enjoined on Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus . And all it denotes is ) that hold fast to the same Din ( Religion ) and do not make divisions in it . That ( Oneness of Allah ) to which you call them is quite hard for those who set up partners with Allah . Allah ( Himself ) chooses whom He pleases ( for exclusive nearness ) in His Presence , and shows the path to ( come ) towards Himself to everyone who turns ( towards Allah ) heartily .
And they did not break up into factions but only after knowledge had reached them merely on account of their mutual obstinacy ( and stubbornness ) . And had the Command of your Lord not gone forth concerning ( respite ) for an appointed time , the judgment would have been given between them . And verily those who were made inheritors of the Book after them are ( caught ) themselves in deceitful doubt about it .
So keep calling them to this ( Din [ Religion ] ) , and hold fast ( to it ) as the Command has been given to you . And do not give any heed to their desires and say ( this ) : I believe in every Book that Allah has revealed and I have been commanded to do justice between you . Allah is our Lord as well as your Lord . For us are our deeds and for you are your deeds . There is no debate and dispute between us and you . Allah will gather us all together and to Him is the return ( of all ) .
And those who dispute about ( the Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah after it has been accepted , their discussion and contention is false in the sight of their Lord . And upon them is the wrath ( of Allah ) and for them is severe torment .
Allah is He Who has revealed the Book with the Truth and ( also sent down ) the balance ( of equality and justice ) . And who has put you on alert perhaps the Last Hour is near ?
They who do not put ( any ) belief in it seek to hasten this ( Hour ) , and those who believe fear it and know that its coming is the truth . Beware ! Those who argue about the Hour are in extreme error .
Allah is Most Bountiful and Benevolent towards His servants . He bestows His sustenance and Bounty upon whom He wills . And He is Most Strong , Almighty .
He who seeks the harvest in the Hereafter , We grant him further increase in his harvest . And he who desires the harvest of this world We give him some of it , but in the Hereafter there does not remain any share for him .
Have they any ( such ) partners who have established for them a path of Din ( Religion ) about which Allah has not given any Command ? And had the Command of Judgment not ( gone forth ) already , the matter between them would have been settled . And surely there is a painful torment for the wrongdoers .
You will see the wrongdoers fearing those ( deeds ) that they have earned . And that ( torment ) is bound to befall them . And they who believe and persist in pious deeds will be in the gardens of Paradise . There will be for them with their Lord ( all those blessings ) which they will long for . That is indeed a great Bounty .
That is the ( award ) of which Allah gives the good news to those servants who believe and do pious works persistently . Say : I do not ask for any recompense for this ( preaching the faith in Messengership ) but ( seek ) love for ( my ) kindreds and ( my and Allahs ) nearness . And whoever earns good We shall increase for him the reward in the Hereafter . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative .
Do they say that this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) has invented a lie against Allah ? So if Allah wills , He may set a seal ( of patience and steadfastness ) on your holy heart ( so that their absurd talk may not hurt you ) . And Allah eliminates falsehood and maintains the Truth proved ( i . e . established ) by His Words . Surely , He knows best the secrets of the breasts .
And He is the One Who accepts His servants repentance , and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
And He grants the prayers of those who believe and keep doing pious works , and gives them of His Bounty more ( than they pray for ) . But for those who do not believe is severe punishment .
And if Allah were to expand sustenance for all His servants abundantly , they would surely transgress and revolt in the earth . But He sends down as He pleases according to the measure ( of needs ) . Surely He is Best Aware of His servants ( needs ) , All - Seeing .
And He is the One Who sends down rain after they lose hope and spreads His Mercy . And He , the Guardian , is Most Praiseworthy .
And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and ( the creation ) of the moving ( i . e . living ) creatures which He has scattered in them . And He is also Most Powerful to assemble them ( all ) when He wills .
And whatever misfortune befalls you , ( comes upon you ) as a result of that ( evil work ) which your own hands have done while He forgives most of your ( misdoings ) .
And you cannot thwart Allah ( anywhere ) on earth ( with your schemes ) . And , except Allah , none ( of your idols ) will be your guardian and helper .
And among His Signs are the ships on the sea high like mountains .
If He wills He would cause the wind to be absolutely still and the vessels would stand halted on the surface of the sea . Surely there are Signs in it for everyone who observes patience and remains grateful .
Or He would drown those ( vessels or ships ) due to their ( evil ) deeds which they have earned but He forgives many ( mistakes ) .
And those who argue about Our Revelations should know that there is for them no way to escape .
And whatever ( wealth and comforts ) have been given to you is a small benefit for ( a few days ) worldly life , and what is with Allah is better and everlasting . And ( that ) is for those who believe and put trust in their Lord .
And those who refrain from major sins and the indecencies ; and when they feel furious , they forgive .
And those who submit to the Command of their Lord , and establish Prayer , and their decisions are made through consultations , and spend in Our Way out of the provision which We have given them .
And those who take revenge when they are wronged ( by a tyrant and wrongdoer ) .
And the requital of an evil is the like of that evil . Then he who forgives and ( by forgiving ) reforms , his reward is with Allah . Verily , He does not make friends with the wrongdoers .
And indeed he who avenges the wrong that has been done to him , they will no way be ( blamed and taken to task ) .
But the way ( to persecute ) is only against those who wrong the people and spread corruption and violence unjustly in the land . It is they for whom there is a painful torment .
And surely he who keeps patience and forgives , it is certainly of the deeds which demand great courage and resolve .
And the one whom Allah holds astray for him there is no protector after that . And you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the torment ( of the Last Day ) , will say : Is there any way to go back ( to the world ) ?
And you will see them brought to Hell with their heads bent with disgrace and fear , looking at it covertly ( with stealthy glance ) and the believers will say : Surely the losers are those who put their own souls and their families into loss on the Last Day . Remember ! Indeed the wrongdoers will remain in ( the agony of ) a lasting torment .
And there will be no supporters for the ( disbelievers ) to help them against Allah . And he whom Allah holds astray , there is no way left for him ( towards guidance ) .
Accept and submit to the Command of your Lord before the Day comes for which there is no averting from Allah . There will be no shelter for you on that Day . Nor will there be any possibility for you to deny .
( Even ) then if they turn away , We have not sent you with any responsibility for ( saving ) them ( from destruction ) . You are responsible only to convey ( the Message of Truth ) . And verily when We make man taste ( the savour ) of Mercy from Our Presence , he feels pleased . But when some misfortune reaches them owing to the ( evil ) deeds sent ahead by their own hands then no doubt man ( proves ) to be highly ungrateful .
For Allah alone is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . He creates what He likes . He blesses with girls whom He wills and blesses with boys whom He wills .
Or He gives them daughters and sons ( both ) and makes infertile whom He wills . Surely he is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And every man has not ( this ) faculty that Allah should speak to him ( directly ) except that by Revelation ( He bestows upon some the holy status of Prophethood ) or ( should talk ) from behind a veil ( as He spoke to Musa [ Moses ] on Mount Tur of Sinai ) or by sending some angel as a messenger to reveal with His permission what Allah may will . ( In any case , the medium and mediation of communication of Allahs Word for mankind is none but the Prophet and the Messenger . ) Surely He is Most High , Most Wise .
So thus We revealed to you Our Spirit ( of hearts and souls ) by Our Command ( that is the Quran ) . And ( before Revelation ) you did not know what the Book was , nor did you know ( through your own endeavour and insight the details of the injunctions of ) faith ( which were sent down and determined later ) . But We made it a Light . By means of this Light We give guidance to those of Our servants whom We intend . And assuredly you alone provide guidance towards the straight path .
Ha - Mim ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By the illumined Book .
Verily , We have made it the Quran in the Arabic ( language ) so that you may understand .
Verily , it is inscribed with Us in ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz [ the Preserved Table ] ) , the origin of all the Books . It is certainly exalted ( over all the Books ) , full of wisdom .
And should We withhold this Reminder from you because you are a people who exceed limits ?
And how many a Messenger We sent among the preceding communities !
And no Prophet came to them but they used to make fun of him .
And We destroyed the people who were more powerful than these ( disbelievers of Makka ) . And the annals of the bygone people have been cited ( on many preceding occasions ) .
And if you ask them : Who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will certainly say : The Almighty , All - Knowing ( Lord ) has created them .
( He is ) the One Who has made the earth a cradle for you and has made for you pathways in it so that you may reach the destination .
And He Who sent water from the sky according to a measure ( of necessity ) . Then with that We gave life to the dead city . You will also be brought forth ( after death from the earth ) in the same way .
And He Who has brought into existence creatures of all kinds and made for you ships and vessels and the cattle you ride ( on sea as well as on land ) .
So that you may sit on their backs ( seats ) firmly , then remember the favour of your Lord . When you sit firmly on it ( the seat of your means of transport ) , say : Glory be to Him Who has made it subservient to us whereas we could not bring it under control .
And indeed We are bound to return to our Lord .
And those ( polytheists ) have made some of His servants His components ( of Divinity by declaring them His children ) . Verily man is blatantly ungrateful .
( O disbelievers ! Reply according to your caliber of thinking : ) Has He chosen ( for Himself ) daughters out of His Creation and has specified you to sons ?
Whereas when the news is given to anyone of them ( of the birth of a daughter at his home ) whom they have held as an image of the Most Kind Lord , his face turns dark and he is filled with anger and grief .
And ( will Allah make her His offspring for partnership and assistance in His affairs ) who will be brought up in trinkets and beautification and who shall never be bold ( in giving her opinion expressly ) in a contention ( owing to her mild , modest and feminine temperament ) ?
And they have declared the angels who are the servants of the Most Kind ( Lord ) to be women . Were they present at the time of their creation ? ( They were not , so ) now their witness will be recorded and they will be interrogated ( on the Last Day ) .
And they say : If the Most Kind had intended , we would not have worshipped these ( idols ) . They do not know anything about this ( as well ) . They only tell lies out of fancy .
Have We given them before this any Book which they stick to as an authority ?
( No , ) but they say : Indeed we found our fathers following a course ( and a religion ) , and surely we are rightly guided ( following ) in their footsteps .
And the same way We never sent any Warner to a town before you but their chiefs and the affluent people among them said : Surely we found our fathers following a course and a religion and certainly we are following in their footsteps .
( The Messenger ) said : Even though I bring you a way ( and Din [ Religion ] ) better than that on which you found your fathers ? They said : We deny whatever you have been sent with .
So We took revenge on them . So see what was the end of those who denied !
And when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said to his father ( real uncle but called him father as he brought him up ) and his people : Surely I despise all these things that you worship .
Except for Him Who has created me . So He alone will show me the path very soon .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) made that ( formula of the Oneness of Allah ) the lasting Word among his descendants and race so that they may remain bent ( towards Allah ) .
In truth , I bestowed upon these people and their ancestors ( worldly ) provision ( for the sake of and due to the mediation of Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) until there came to them the Truth ( the Quran ) and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] with clear and illumining exposition .
And when the Truth reached them they said : This is magic and we deny it .
And they said : Why has this Quran not been sent down upon some high - ranking personage ( i . e . some chief , landlord , or capitalist ) of the two towns ( Makka and Taif ) ?
Is it they who distribute the Mercy ( of the Prophethood ) of your Lord ? We distribute among them ( the resources of ) economy in the life of this world , and We alone raise some of them in grades ( of wealth and resources ) over the others .
( Do We do this so that ) some of them ( who are rich ) should make fun of the others ( who are poor ? This is mockery of poverty if , due to this , you do not consider someone as deserving the Mercy of the Prophethood . )
And the Mercy of your Lord is better than that ( wealth ) which they amass ( and become arrogant ) .
And had it not been that mankind ( converging on disbelief ) would have become one community , We would have made , for those who disbelieve in the Most Kind Lord , silver roofs for their houses and silver staircases by which they ascend .
And likewise ( silver ) doors of their houses and the couches ( too ) on which they recline .
And ( would also have done ) ornamentation of gold and jewels ( over this silver work ) . But all that is the temporary and worthless possession of the life of this world . And ( the beauty and ornamentation of ) the Hereafter is with your Lord ( which is ) only for the pious .
And whoever closes his eyes to the remembrance of the Most Kind ( Lord ) , We appoint a Satan to dominate him and stick to him all the time .
And these ( satans ) hinder them from the path ( of guidance ) but they maintain this wrong perception that they are on the path of guidance .
Until when he will come to Us , he will say ( to his companion Satan ) : Alas ! Would that there had been between me and you the distance of east and west . So ( you were ) the most evil companion indeed !
And this Day it is not profitable for you ( to have this aspiration ) whereas you kept doing wrong ( all your life . Today ) all of you will share the torment .
Then will you make the deaf hear or show the path of guidance to the blind and those who are in open error ?
So if We take you away ( from the world ) , even then We shall take revenge on them .
Or We show you that ( torment ) which We have promised them . Certainly We have absolute control over them .
So hold fast to this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you . Surely you are ( firm ) on the straight path .
And verily this ( Quran ) is the most great honour for you and for your Umma ( Community ) . And , ( O people , ) you will soon be asked ( how strong and firm a relation you established with the Quran . )
And ask the Messengers We sent before you whether We made any gods to be worshipped instead of the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And certainly We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs . He said : Indeed I am the Messenger of the Lord of all the worlds .
So when he came to them with Our Signs , there they began laughing at the ( Signs ) .
And never did We show them any sign but ( that ) it used to be far greater than the resembling sign preceding it . And ( eventually ) We seized them ( many a time ) with the torment so that they might desist ( from the evil course ) .
And they said : O Magician , pray to your Lord for us according to the promise He has made to you . ( Then ) surely we shall be guided .
But when ( granting the prayer of Musa [ Moses ] ) We removed from them that torment , they at once violated the promise .
And Pharaoh ( arrogantly ) proclaimed among his people , saying : O my people , is not the kingdom of Egypt under my control , and ( are ) these streams ( not mine ) which are flowing beneath my ( palaces ) ? So do you not see ?
( Is it not the fact that ) I am better than this worthless low man who cannot even talk clearly ?
Then ( if he is a truthful Messenger ) why are the bracelets of gold not sent upon him or why do the angels not come with him in ranks ( in succession ) ?
So he made a fool of his people ( by these utterances ) and they followed him . Indeed they alone were a disobedient people .
But when they spurred Our wrath ( by denigrating the dignity of Musa [ Moses ] ) , We took revenge on them and drowned them all .
So We made them a tale and a lesson of warning for the communities to succeed .
And when the example of ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) son of Maryam ( Mary ) is given , your people ( mockingly ) laugh .
And say : Are our gods better or he ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) ? They say this only to have a dispute with you . No doubt , they are highly quarrelsome .
He ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) was only an ( exalted ) servant whom We blessed with favour . And We made him an example ( of Our Might ) for the Children of Israel .
And had We so willed , We would have made angels who would have been your successors to replace you in the earth .
And surely ( when heIsa [ Jesus ] comes down from heaven ) , he will be a sign of ( the nearness of ) the Last Hour . So do not doubt it at all . And keep following Me . This is the straight path .
And let not Satan hinder you ( from this way ) at all . No doubt he is your open enemy .
And when Isa [ Jesus ] came with evident Signs , he said : Surely I have come to you with wisdom and understanding , and ( with the purpose ) that I may make clear to you some of the matters on which you disagree . So fear Allah and obey me .
Surely Allah is the One Who is your Lord and my Lord ( as well ) . So worship Him alone . That is the only straight path .
Then various sects cropped up among them . So those who did wrong , woe to them on account of the torment of a grievous Day .
What are they waiting for ( save ) the Hour that should seize them all of a sudden while they have no awareness of it ?
On that Day , all friends and acquaintances will become enemies to one another except the pious . ( Only their friendship and nearness [ wilaya ] will prove fruitful . )
( It will be said to them : ) O My ( intimate ) servants , there is no fear for you this Day , nor shall you grieve .
( It is ) they who believed in Our Revelations and were always obedient ( to Us ) .
Enter Paradise , you and your intimate companions ( all ) ; you will be honoured ( with blessings , comforts and pleasures of Paradise ) .
The plates and drinking cups made of gold will be passed around among them , and all those things which the hearts will long for , and ( which ) will cool the eyes will be available there . And you will live there forever .
And , ( O Godfearing folk , ) this is the Paradise of which you have been made the owners , a recompense of those ( works ) which you used to do .
There are abundant fruits in it for you to eat .
Indeed the sinners will live forever in the torment of Hell .
Which will never be decreased for them and they will be lying there in endless despair .
And We have not wronged them but they were themselves the wrongdoers .
And they will cry out ( to the Guard of Hell ) : O Master , ( better it is if ) your Lord causes us to die . He will say : ( Now ) you will live ( in the same plight ) forever .
Surely We brought you the Truth but most of you disliked the Truth .
Have they ( the disbelievers of Makka ) finalized ( any scheme against the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ? So We ( too ) are going to take the ultimate decision .
Do they think that We do not hear their secret talk and whisperings ? Why not ? ( We do listen . ) And the angels sent by Us also remain with them busy writing .
Say : If ( supposing the impossible ) the Most Kind Lord had a son ( or children ) , I would have been the first one to worship ( the same ) .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth , the Lord of the Throne , Glory be to Him , Transcendent of all what they ascribe ( to Him ) .
So leave them . Let them remain indulged in vain talk and absurd sport until they meet the Day which they are being promised .
And He is the One Who is God in the heaven and God in the earth ( as well ) and He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And Most Blessed is He to Whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and ( also of all ) that is between them . And He has the knowledge of the Last Hour ( as well ) , and you will be returned to Him alone .
And those they ( i . e . the disbelievers ) worship instead of Allah have no power to intercede . But ( on the contrary they do have the power of intercession ) who bear witness to the Truth , and they also know it ( with certitude ) .
And if you ask them : Who has created them ? they will certainly say : Allah . Then where are they wandering disorientated ?
And by his ( Esteemed Messengers ) saying ( like this ) : O Lord , surely they are a people who ( somehow ) do not come to believe .
So , ( O My Beloved , ) turn your face away from them and say ( like this : Alright , our greeting is : ) Peace ! Then they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
Ha , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By this Light - Giving Book .
Surely We have sent it down in a blessed night . Surely We are the Warner .
In this ( night ) judgment is given on all matters of wisdom ( separately ) .
By Our Command ; surely it is We Who send .
( It ) is Mercy from your Lord . Verily He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , provided you have faith with certitude .
There is no God but He . He is the One Who gives life and causes death . He is your Lord and the Lord of your fathers ( as well ) .
Yet they are in doubt , busy playing .
So wait for the Day when the sky will cause a clear smoke to appear .
Which will envelop people ( i . e . will encompass everything ) . That will be a painful torment .
( They will then say : ) O our Lord ! Remove this torment from us . Surely we believe .
How can their accepting the admonition now be ( of any use ) whereas there came to them a Messenger with clear exposition ?
But they turned their faces from him and ( denigrating ) they said : ( He ) is an educated madman .
Indeed We remove the torment a little ( but ) you will certainly start reiterating ( the same disbelief ) .
The Day when We will seize with the Greatest Seizure , ( that Day ) We shall certainly exact revenge .
And in fact We put to trial the people of Pharaoh ( also ) before them and the exalted Messenger ( Musa [ Moses ] ) came to them .
( He said : ) Hand over to me the servants of Allah ( i . e . the Children of Israel ) . Verily I am a trusted Messenger for your guidance and leadership .
And do not rebel against Allah . I have come to you with the enlightening proof .
And I have indeed sought the protection of my Lord and your Lord lest you should stone me .
And if you do not believe in me then keep away from me .
Then he prayed to his Lord : Surely they are a sinful people .
( Allah said : ) Then set out with My servants by night . You shall certainly be chased .
And ( after you pass through ) leave the river still and split open . Surely they are an army who will be drowned .
How many a garden and spring they left behind !
And green crops and magnificent buildings !
And blessings ( and comforts ) in which they used to luxuriate !
So it happened ! We made another people the inheritors of all that .
Then neither the heaven nor the earth wept over them , nor were they given respite .
And verily We delivered the Children of Israel from a humiliating suffering .
From Pharaoh . Indeed he was of the most rebellious transgressors .
And surely We chose them ( the Children of Israel ) above ( the contemporary civilizations of ) the world on the basis of knowledge .
And We bestowed upon them Signs containing an obvious favour ( and a clear trial ) .
Surely they say .
There is nothing after our first death and we will not be raised up ( again ) .
So bring back our ancestors ( alive ) if you are truthful .
Well , are they better or the people of Tubba ( the people of Asad Abu Kurib al - Hamiri , the King of Yemen ) and those who were before them ? We destroyed ( all of ) them . Surely they were people given to evildoing .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them merely in sport .
We have created them both with ( the purpose and reason ) of Truth . But most of them do not know .
Surely the Day of Judgment is the appointed time for all of them .
The Day when a friend shall not avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped .
Except those to whom Allah has shown Mercy . ( They will intercede for one another . ) Surely He is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed the tree bearing thorny fruit .
Will be the food of the major sinners .
It will boil in the bellies like molten copper .
Like the seething of simmering water .
( It will be commanded : ) Seize him and drag him forcefully to the midst of Hell .
Then torment him by pouring boiling water over his head .
Taste it ! Yes , you it is the respectable and venerable ( in your notion and claim ) .
Certainly this is the very Hell you used to doubt .
Assuredly the Godfearing will be in a place of calm and peace .
Amid gardens and springs .
Dressed in fine silk and heavy brocade , facing one another .
So will it happen ! And We will marry them to fair maidens having lovely wide eyes .
( Sitting ) there , they will call calmly for every kind of fruit .
There ( in Paradise ) they will not taste death except the first death ( which would have passed ) . And Allah will save them from the torment of Hell .
It is a Bounty of your Lord ( i . e . your Lord will bestow through your mediation alone ) . That is but a great success .
So We have made this ( Quran ) easy in your own tongue so that they may take advice .
So ( do ) wait . Certainly they ( too ) are waiting . ( You will see the revenge and their evil end and they will see your glory and My favours to the believers through your mediation . )
Ha . Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The revelation of ( this ) Book is from Allah , Almighty , Most Wise .
Indeed there are signs for the believers in the heavens and the earth .
And in your ( own ) creation , and in the animals which He scatters , there are signs for those who believe with certitude .
And in the alternation of night and day and in that provision ( of rain ) which Allah sends down from the sky , and by that gives life to the earth after its death , and ( in the same way ) in changing the wind direction , there are Signs for those who apply reason .
These are the Revelations of Allah which We recite to you with absolute Truth . Then what will they believe in after Allah and His Revelations ?
Woe to every liar given to fabricating false allegations ( and ) every dreadful evildoer .
The one who listens to the Revelations of Allah that are recited to him , then insists ( on his disbelief ) arrogantly as if he did not hear them , give him the news of a grievous torment .
And when he learns about anything of Our Verses ( of the Quran ) , he makes it a joke . It is they for whom there is humiliating torment .
Beyond ( their current term of life ) , there is Hell . And ( the worldly riches ) which they have earned will be of no use to them . Nor will those idols be ( of any benefit ) that they have made guardians instead of Allah . And there is a very severe torment for them .
This ( Quran ) is guidance . And those who disbelieved in the Revelations of Allah , for them is in store extremely grievous torment .
Allah is the One Who has placed the sea under your control so that ships and vessels may sail in it by His Command , so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e . sustenance through sea routes as well ) , and that you may become grateful ( to Him ) .
And He has made subservient to you , out of His will , whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all of it ( under a system ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who ponder .
Say to the believers to disregard those who neither hope for nor fear ( the coming of ) the Days of Allah , so that He may give them full reward of those ( deeds ) which they used to earn .
Whoever does a righteous work does it for ( the benefit of ) his own soul and whoever commits some evil act , then he alone is to face ( suffering caused by it ) . Then all of you will be returned to your Lord .
And surely We gave to the Children of Israel the Book , the regime and Prophethood and provided them with sustenance of pure things . And We exalted them above ( their contemporary ) worlds ( i . e . the nations and civilizations of that age ) .
And We gave them clear proofs of religion ( and Prophethood ) . But they disagreed ( about it ) after the knowledge ( of raising the Prophet Muhammad ) had come to them , merely because of their mutual jealousy , spite and antagonism . Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment concerning the matter in which they used to disagree .
Then We set you on the open path of Sharia ( Islamic Law ) . So follow it persistently . And do not yield to the desires of those who are simply unaware ( of the glory , dignity and trueness of your Din [ Religion ] ) .
Surely these people will not be of any help to you at all ( despite promises ) from Allah ( for crucial time of hardships coming in the way of Islam ) . And in truth the wrongdoers ( in the world ) are friends and helpers only to one another and Allah is the Friend and Helper of the Godfearing .
This ( Quran ) contains proofs , which provide vision and lessons of warning to the people , and is Guidance and Mercy for those who believe with certitude .
Do those who have earned evil deeds think that We will make them resemble those who believe and do good deeds ( so as ) to make their life and death alike ? The claim , which they ( the disbelievers ) make , is the worst evil .
And Allah created the heavens and the earth with ( a strategy based on ) Truth in order that every soul is rewarded for the deeds that it earns and they will not be wronged .
Have you seen him who has made his desire his god and Allah has held him astray despite his knowledge and has sealed his ears and his heart and has blindfolded his eyes ? Then who can guide him after Allah ? So do you not accept advice ?
And they say : There is nothing ( else ) except our worldly life . We die and live here ( only ) . And nothing kills us except ( circumstances and occurrences of ) time ( i . e . they deny Allah and the Hereafter absolutely ) . And they simply do not have any knowledge of this ( reality ) . They follow only their speculation and assumption .
And when Our clear Verses are recited to them , they do not have any plea except to say : Bring back our fathers ( raised alive ) if you are truthful .
Say : Allah is the One Who gives you life and He is the One Who causes you to die . Then He will gather all of you towards the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . But most people do not know .
And the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . And the Day when the Last Hour comes , then ( all ) the disbelievers will run into serious loss .
And you will see every party ( of the disbelievers and beliers ) sitting , fallen on their knees . Every community will be called to its book ( of deeds ) : You will be rewarded Today for the deeds that you used to do .
This is Our record that will speak about you with absolute truth . Verily We used to ( preserve ) by getting transcribed what you used to do .
So those who believe and do good deeds , their Lord will admit them to His Mercy . That is nothing but an evident success .
And those who disbelieved ( it will be said to them : ) Were My Verses not recited to you ? But you showed arrogance and you were the evildoers .
And when it was said : The promise of Allah is true and there is no doubt about ( the coming of ) the Last Hour , you used to say : We do not know what the Last Hour is , nor do we have any faith in it .
And all their evil works will be exposed which they used to do , and that ( torment ) will beset them which they used to make fun of .
And it will be said ( to them ) : Today We forget you as you forgot your Meeting on this Day . And Hell is your abode and there will be no helper for you .
That ( is ) so because you made fun of Allahs Revelations , and the worldly life deceived you . So Today neither will they be taken out of that ( Hell ) , nor will be accepted from them any attempt to seek ( Allahs ) pleasure by means of repentance .
So all praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Lord of the heavens and the Master of the earth ( and also ) the Sustainer of all the worlds .
And all Greatness ( i . e . Eminence ) in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him alone and He is the One Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
Ha - Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The revelation of this Book is from Allah , Almighty , Most Wise .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and ( the Creation ) that is between them but with wisdom and ( fixing of ) the appointed term . And those who have disbelieved turn away from what they have been warned of .
Say : Tell me of the ( idols ) you worship instead of Allah ; show me what they have created in the earth , or ( bring it forth if ) they have a partnership in ( the creation of ) the heavens . Bring me ( as a proof ) any Book ( revealed ) before this ( Quran ) or some remnant of knowledge ( of the bygone people in transit down the line ) , if you are truthful .
And who can be more in error than someone who worships such ( idols ) apart from Allah as cannot answer ( his question ) till the Day of Resurrection ? And those ( idols ) have no consciousness of their ( very ) prayer and worship .
And when mankind shall be gathered ( on the Day of Resurrection ) those ( false gods ) will be their enemies and will deny their worship ( for their own absolution ) .
And when Our clear Verses are recited to them ( then ) the disbelievers say about the Truth ( the Quran ) while it has come to them : This is obvious magic .
Do they say that ( the Messenger ) has fabricated it ( the Quran ) ? Say : If I have concocted it then you have no authority to save me from ( the torment of ) Allah . And He knows best the ( words ) you utter about this ( Quran ) as mockery . He ( Allah ) is Sufficient as witness between me and you . And He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : I am not the first Messenger ( towards mankind that no precedent of Messengership exists before me ) . Nor do I know of my own accord ( i . e . purely by means of my own mental faculty and self - application ) what will be done to me or what will be done to you . ( My knowledge is nothing except that ) I follow that Revelation alone which is sent to me . ( It is this that provides me knowledge about everything . ) And I am simply a clear Warner ( on the basis of this knowledge obtained through Revelation ) .
Say : Tell me , if this ( Quran ) is from Allah and you deny it and a witness from the Children of Israel ( also ) bears testimony to the mention of ( the revelation of ) such a Book ( in the Revealed Books revealed earlier ) , then he believes ( in it as well ) but ( despite that ) you show arrogance , ( then what will be your fate ? ) Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
And the disbelievers said to the believers : Had it ( Din of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) been ( a ) better ( religion ) , these people would not have advanced towards it taking lead over us . ( We would have accepted it before anyone else . ) And when they ( the disbelievers ) have not taken guidance from it ( themselves ) now they say : This is an old lie ( and a fabrication ) .
And before it was the Book of Musa ( Moses [ the Torah ] ) , a Guide and Mercy . And this Book confirms that . It is in the Arabic language to warn the wrongdoers and give good news to the pious .
Surely those who say : Allah is our Lord , then hold fast ( to it ) have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
They it is , the people of Paradise , who will live in it forever . This is the reward of the deeds they used to do .
And We have commanded man to be benevolent towards his parents . His mother bears him ( in the womb ) with pain and gives birth to him with pain . And bearing him ( in the womb ) and weaning of him ( i . e . the period of pregnancy and feeding ) is ( spread over ) thirty months . Till , when he attains to manhood and then reaches ( the fully mature age of ) forty years , he says : O my Lord , bestow on me the ability to give You thanks for the favour which You have done to me and my parents , and that I may do such deeds as may please You , and endow me and my children with virtue and piousness . Assuredly I turn to You , and certainly I am of those who obey You in submissiveness .
It is they whose good works We accept and overlook their omissions . ( It is ) they ( who ) are the people of Paradise . This is the True Promise which is being made to them .
And he who says to his parents : Fie on you ! Do you promise me that I shall be brought forth ( from the grave and given life once more ) when generations have passed away before me ? Now both ( the parents ) pray to Allah for help ( and say to the son : ) Woe to you , ( O son ! ) Accept faith . Surely Allahs promise is true . But he says ( in reply ) : These ( words ) are nothing but fiction of the bygone people .
It is they against whom the Command of Allahs ( torment ) has proved true among generations that have passed of the jinn as well as mankind . Surely they ( all ) were the losers .
And the ranks ( in Paradise and Hell ) are allocated for all ( separately ) according to the ( good and evil ) deeds which they do , so that ( Allah ) pays them back in full for their actions and they shall not be wronged at all .
And the Day when the disbelievers will be brought before the Fire of Hell ( it will be said to them : ) You received your favourite and tasteful luxuries in the life of the world and exacted from them ( maximum ) benefit . So , Today you will be rewarded punishment of humiliation because you lived on earth with arrogance unjustly and ( also ) because you used to disobey .
And , ( O Beloved , ) remember ( Hud ) , the kinship brother of the people of Ad , when he warned his people ( of the dire consequences of their evil deeds ) in al - Ahqaf , ( the Sand - Dunes [ a valley in Yemen , between Uman ( Oman ) and Mahra ] ) although ( a number of ) Warners ( Messengers ) had passed before and after him , ( saying : ) Worship no one but Allah . I fear for you the punishment of a ( Terrible ) Day .
They said : Have you come to us to turn us away from our gods ? So bring us that ( torment ) you are threatening us with , if you are of those who speak the truth .
He said : The knowledge ( of the Hour of the torment ) is with Allah alone . And I am only transmitting to you the injunctions which I have been sent with . But I can see that you are an ignorant people .
So when they saw that ( torment ) advancing on their valleys like a cloud , they said : This is the cloud that is going to rain upon us . ( No , not so ; ) this ( cloud ) is rather that ( torment ) which you were restlessly seeking to hasten . ( This ) is the storm in which is ( approaching ) a grievous punishment .
( That ) will destroy everything by the command of its Lord . They were ( destroyed ) in such a way that nothing could be seen except their ( ruined ) houses . That is how We punish the evildoers .
( O people of Makka ! ) In fact We had given them power and ability in those fields of activity in which We have not granted you potential . And We blessed them with hearing and sight and ( invaluable qualities of ) head and heart . But neither their ears nor their eyes , nor their heads and hearts were of any use to them since they kept denying the Signs of Allah . And ( at last ) that ( torment ) besieged them which they used to laugh at .
And , ( O people of Makka , ) indeed We destroyed many a town around you , and displayed Our Signs time and again so that they might turn ( back to them from disbelief ) .
Then why did those ( idols ) not come to their aid which they had taken as gods besides Allah for attaining ( His ) nearness ? But in fact they ( false gods ) were lost from them . And this ( setting up false gods ) was their lie . And ( it was ) this fabrication that they used to weave .
And , when ( O Beloved , ) We diverted a group of jinn who listened to the Quran with active attention to attend to you ( and ) when they came there ( i . e . before the Holy Presence of the Messenger ) they said ( to one another ) : Keep silent . And when ( the recitation ) was over they went back grown into warners to their people ( i . e . the callers to the Truth ) .
They said : O our people ( O community of jinn ) , indeed we have heard such a Book that has been revealed after ( the Torah of ) Musa ( Moses . It ) confirms ( the Books ) that came before it and guides to the true ( Din [ Religion ] ) and the straight road .
O our people ! Accept the call of the Caller ( the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) to Allah and believe in him . Allah will , then , forgive your sins and save you from a painful punishment .
And he who does not accept the call of the Caller ( the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) to Allah , cannot thwart Allah ( by running away ) on earth . Nor will there be any helpers for him except Allah . It is they who are in open error .
Do they not know that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by creating them has ( also ) the power to bring the dead back to life ( again ) ? Yes , of course , He has power over everything .
And the Day when the disbelievers will be brought to the Fire ( it will be said to them : ) Is this ( punishment ) not based on the truth ? They will say : Yes , of course ! By our Lord ( it is true ) . ( Allah ) will say : Then taste the punishment you used to deny .
( O Beloved ! ) So be steadfast as ( other ) Messengers with unwavering determination too were steadfast and do not hasten ( to seek the torment ) for these ( deniers ) . The Day they will see this ( punishment in the Hereafter ) which they are being promised , ( they will think ) as though they did not stay ( in the world ) for more than an hour . ( This is but ) the communication of the Message ( from Allah ) . The people other than the disobedient ones will not be destroyed .
Those who disbelieve and hinder ( others ) from the way of Allah , Allah destroys their actions ( as for their reward in the Hereafter ) .
And those who embrace faith and do pious works persistently and believe in this ( Book ) which has been revealed to Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and that is the very Truth from their Lord , Allah erases their evil works from their ( record of deeds ) and refines their states of being .
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and those who believe follow the Truth ( sent down ) from their Lord . That is how Allah illustrates for people their states of being .
So when you are to fight ( for the elimination of militancy and terrorism ) against the ( warring ) disbelievers ( in the battlefield ) , strike their necks ( while fighting because they took innocent human lives and destroyed peace by their terrorist activities ) till , when you have killed a good many of them ( in the battle ) , then tie ( the remaining prisoners ) tightly . Thereafter either set ( them ) free ( without ransom ) as a favour or ( free them ) for ransom ( i . e . cost of freedom ) till the warring ( hostile army ) lays down its weapons ( i . e . announces the truce ) . That is ( the command ) . And if Allah had willed , He would have avenged Himself on them ( without war ) . But ( He did not do so ) in order to try some of you by means of others . And as for those who are slain in the way of Allah , He will not at all make their actions fruitless .
He will soon put them on the straight path ( of Paradise ) and will greatly enhance their states of being ( in the Hereafter ) .
And He will ( ultimately ) admit them to Paradise which He has ( already ) made well known to them .
O Believers ! If you help ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah , He will help you and will make your feet firm .
And those who disbelieve , for them is destruction and ( Allah ) has ruined their actions .
That is because they hate that ( Book ) which Allah has sent down so He has made their actions come to nothing .
Have they not travelled and toured in the earth so that they could see the fate of those who passed before them ? Allah cast upon them total destruction . There are many such calamities awaiting the disbelievers .
That is because Allah is the Protector and Helper of those who believe and for sure the disbelievers do not have any protector and helper .
Surely those who believe and do pious works , Allah will admit them to Gardens with streams flowing under them , and those who disbelieve and are enjoying ( worldly ) gains and eat as cattle ( animals ) do , so Hell alone will be their abode .
And , ( O Beloved , ) how many a town have We destroyed whose citizens wielded greater power ( i . e . resources and authority ) than ( the residents of ) your city ( Makka ) whose ( powerful chiefs ) have driven you out ( by emigration ) ! We have destroyed them as well and no one came to their help ( who could save them ) .
Is someone who is ( firm ) on the clear proof from his Lord like those whose evil actions are shown to them as fair and who follow the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves ?
A feature of the Paradise which is promised to the Godfearing is that there are in it streams of ( such ) water as will never putrefy ( in smell or colour ) , and ( in it ) will be streams of milk whose taste and flavour will never change and streams of ( such a pure ) wine that is an absolute delight for all who drink it and streams of purified honey ; and ( in it ) will be fruits of every kind ( for them ) and forgiveness ( of every sort ) from their Lord . Can this ( pious man ) be like those who are permanent residents of Hell and who will be given scalding water to drink which will cut their gut into pieces ?
And among them are those who give ears to you ( without their heads and hearts in it ) till , when they leave your presence and go ( out ) , they ask those who have been given ( profitable ) knowledge : What is it that he ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) just said ? It is they whose hearts Allah has sealed up and they are following their lusts .
And as for those who have taken Guidance , Allah increases their guidance and honours them with their station of Godwariness .
So are they ( the deniers ) now just waiting for the Last Hour to come upon them all of a sudden ? Its Signs have no doubt drawn ( near ) . But what ( good ) will their admonition do to them when the Last Hour ( itself ) approaches ?
Know then that there is no God except Allah and ( to offer worship and to educate the Umma [ Community ] ) always ask forgiveness ( from Allah ) lest an action unworthy of your incomparability ( i . e . lesser than and inferior to your unsurpassed rank ) should get into occurrence mode . And also seek forgiveness ( i . e . intercede ) for the believing men and women , ( for that is all they may have in balance for forgiveness ) . And , ( O people , ) Allah knows ( all about ) the places where you move about ( in the world ) and your mansions of repose ( in the Hereafter ) .
And the believers say why a Sura ( Chapter ) is not revealed ( about the command of fighting ) . But when a clear Sura is revealed and fighting for the cause of Allah is ( plainly ) mentioned in it , you see those who have the disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts looking at you like someone who is fainting to death . So , for them is disaster .
( Best for them would be ) obedience and good words . So when the command of fighting ( for self - protection and self - defence ) was definite ( and firm ) , then if they had been true to Allah ( in obedience and dedication ) , that would have been better for them .
So , ( O hypocrites , ) what is expected of you is that if you ( escape fighting by dodging and ) attain to power , you will spread only mischief in the land and break your ties of kinship ( which Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] have commanded to strengthen with affection and care ) .
It is they whom Allah has cursed and made deaf ( their ears ) and blinded their eyes .
Do they not think over the Quran or are their hearts locked ?
Surely those who turned back ( to disbelief ) after the guidance had become clear to them , Satan ( by fraud ) made ( turning back to disbelief ) look good to them and gave them false hope of living long ( in the world ) .
That is because they said to those who dislike the Book revealed by Allah : We shall obey you in certain matters . And Allah knows best their secret consultations .
Then what will be ( their plight at the time ) when the angels will snatch out their souls ( this way ) that they will be striking their faces and their backs ?
That is because they followed that ( path ) which displeases Allah and disliked His good pleasure ; so He made ( all ) their actions null and void .
Do they who have the disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts think that Allah will never make known their malice and hostilities ?
And if We will We can surely show these ( hypocrites ) to you ( in such a manner ) that you may recognize them by their facial expressions and ( likewise ) you may recognize them by their conversation style and Allah knows ( best ) all your actions .
And We shall certainly try you till We bring to light those of you who strive hard and fight ( firm - footed ) and who observe patience and expose your ( secret ) news ( of hypocritical cowardice ) as well .
Indeed those who disbelieved and hindered ( the people ) from the Way of Allah and opposed the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , ( and chose the path of breaking away from him , ) after the guidance ( i . e . the gnosis of the veneration of the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) had become clear to them , they would not be able to harm Allah anyway ( i . e . would not be able to decrease the incomparable superiority and pre - eminence of the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Allah will wreck ( all ) their works ( due to their opposition to the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not ruin your works .
Indeed those who disbelieved and hindered ( the people ) from the Way of Allah and then died as disbelievers , Allah will never forgive them .
( O Blievers ! ) Do not lose heart and do not ask ( the warring disbelievers ) for peace ( lest it should suggest your weakness ) . And it is you who shall have the upper hand . And Allah is with you , and He will never reduce ( the reward of ) your actions .
Doubtlessly , the life of the world is nothing but merely a sport and pastime . And if you believe and adopt Godwariness , He will pay you the recompense ( of your deeds in full ) , and will not require of you your wealth .
If He asks you for this wealth and puts you under scarcity for that then you will feel constrained ( at heart and ) become miserly . And in this way He will expose your ( inner ) rust ( which results from worldly pursuits ) .
Remember ! You are those who are called to spend in the Way of Allah . Then there are some of you who act miserly . And whoever acts miserly , does it only against himself . And Allah is Independent and you ( all ) are dependent . And if you turn away from the Command of Allah , He will replace you with another people who will not be like you .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Surely We decided for you a bright victory ( and the dominance of Islam so that your great struggle may be completed with success ) .
So that Allah may forgive , for your sake , all the earlier and later sins ( of all those people ) of your Umma ( Community , who struggled , fought and sacrificed by your command ) , and ( this way ) may complete His blessing on you ( outwardly and inwardly ) in the form of Islams victory and forgiveness for your Umma ( Community ) , and may keep ( your Umma ) firm - footed on the straight path ( through your mediation ) .
And so that Allah may grant you most honourable help and support .
He is the One Who sent down calmness and tranquillity into the hearts of the believers so that their faith gets increased with more faith ( and the faith learnt the knowledge of certitude changes into the faith seen - the eye of certitude ) . And all the armies of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah alone . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( All these favours are put together ) so that He may admit the believing men and women to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . And ( moreover ) He may remove from them their evil actions ( as He has forgiven them their mistakes ) . And this is a great success ( of the believers ) in the sight of Allah .
( And so that ) He may punish the hypocritical men and women and the polytheistic men and women who entertain evil assumptions about Allah . For them is ( predestined ) an evil turn of fortune . And Allah has afflicted them with His wrath , has cursed them and has prepared for them Hell . And that is a very evil resting place .
And all armies of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah alone . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Indeed We have sent you as an eyewitness ( of the actions and the state of affairs of Umma [ Community ] to bear testimony on the Day of Reckoning ) and as a Bearer of good news and as a Warner .
So that , ( O people , ) you may believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and may help his ( Din [ Religion ] ) , and revere and venerate him heart and soul , and ( with that ) glorify Allah morning and evening .
( O Beloved ! ) Indeed those who pledge allegiance to you in fact pledge allegiance to Allah alone . Allahs hand is over their hands ( in the form of your hand ) . Then whoever breaks his pledge breaks it only to his own harm . But he who fulfils what he has promised to Allah , He will bless him with immense reward .
Soon the Bedouins who lagged behind ( from participating in al - Hudaibiya ) will say to you ( apologetically ) : Our money matters and families kept us busy . ( Therefore , we missed your company . ) So ask forgiveness for us from Allah . They utter such ( words ) with their tongues that are not in their hearts . Say : Who has the power to save you against ( the decision ) of Allah if He intends to do you harm or if He intends to do you good ? But Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
No , in fact you thought that the Messenger and the believers ( his Companions ) would never return to their families now and ( your ill - commanding selves ) made that ( thought ) seem to your hearts far fascinating . And you imagined a highly evil speculation and became a people bound to perish .
And whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then We have prepared Hell for the disbelievers .
And the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
When you will set out to collect spoils ( of al - Khaibar ) , those who remained behind ( in the march towards al - Hudaibiya ) will say : Allow us also to follow you . They seek to alter Allahs Words . Say : You shall by no means follow us . Allah said the same beforehand . So now they will say : In fact you are jealous of us . The truth is that they understand ( the Truth ) but little .
Say to the Bedouins lagging behind : You will be called up soon ( to fight ) against a hard - hitting warring people . Then you will fight them on ( for the promotion of peace and human dignity ) or they will become Muslims . So if you obey the command , Allah will give you an excellent reward . But if you turn away as you did before , He will make you suffer from an agonizing torment .
There is no blame on the blind or the lame or the sick ( for missing fighting ) . And He who obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , He will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . But whoever turns away ( from obedience ) , He will punish him with grievous torment .
Surely Allah was well pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree ( at al - Hudaibiya ) . So the ( passion of truth and fidelity ) that permeated their hearts , Allah had its knowledge and sent down an exceptional calmness and tranquillity ( into their hearts and awarded them the forthcoming victory ( of Khaibar ) .
And ( also ) the abundant spoils that they are taking and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And Allah has promised you abundant spoils ( resulting from many victories ) which you will win , but He has hastened to you this ( booty of Khaibar ) and has held back from you the hands of the people ( of Makka , Khaibar , Bani Asad and Ghatafan tribes and all other enemies ) , so that it may become a Sign for the believers ( of the forthcoming triumph and victory ) and that He may keep you treading the straight road ( firm - footed , and with the tranquillity of hearts ) .
And other ( big victories of Makka , Hawazin and Hunain , then Persia and Rome ) over which you had no power surely Allah has also encompassed them ( for you ) and Allah wields Absolute Power over everything .
And , ( O Blievers , ) if the disbelievers had fought with you ( at al - Hudaibiya ) , they would certainly have fled turning their backs and found no friend and helper . ( But Allah intended to open the door to you not only of this but many other victories as well . )
( This ) is Allahs pattern that has been established through time and you will never find any change in the Laws of Allah .
And He is the One Who held back the hands of those ( disbelievers ) from you and your hands from them on the frontier of Makka ( near al - Hudaibiya ) after giving you the upper hand over their ( party ) . And Allah best monitors what you do .
It is they who disbelieved and hindered you from the Sacred Mosque , and prevented the sacrificial animals as well that were kept from reaching their place . And had there not been many such believing men and women ( present in Makka ) as you also did not know that you might crush them underfoot without knowing , and some harm and hardship might also be caused to you by them inadvertently , ( We would have allowed you there and then to fight . But the victory of Makka was delayed ) so that Allah might admit to His Mercy whom He willed . Had ( the disbelievers and the believers there ) distinguishably drawn apart from one another , We would have punished the disbelievers with a painful torment .
While the disbelievers anchored in their hearts the conceited obstinacy ( which was ) stubbornness and egocentricity of the days of ignorance , Allah sent down on His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers an exceptional calmness and tranquillity and made them firm on the Word of Godwariness . And it is this that they were most entitled to and ( also ) worthy of . And Allah knows everything full well .
Surely Allah showed to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) the dream exactly true to the reality that , if Allah wills , you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque safely , ( some ) with heads shaved and ( some ) with hair cut short , ( in a state of ) having no fear . So He knew ( the al - Hudaibiya Treaty as a preamble to the Truth of the dream ) which you did not know and gave you an immediate victory ( the victory of Khaibar even before the victory of Makka , soon after returning from al - Hudaibiya . The next year He bestowed the victory of Makka and entry to the Sacred Mosque . )
He is the One Who sent His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with guidance and the Din ( Religion ) of Truth to make it prevail over all other religions . And Allah is Sufficient as a witness ( to the Truthfulness and Trueness of the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is the Messenger of Allah . And those with him are hard and tough against the disbelievers but kind - hearted and merciful among themselves . You see them excessively bowing and prostrating themselves . They simply seek Allahs grace and pleasure . Their mark is an impression of prostrations on their faces ( prominent on the foreheads as light ) . These traits of theirs are ( mentioned ) in the Torah and the ( same ) qualities are also ( described ) in Injil ( the Gospel ) . These ( Companions ) are like a cultivated crop ( of Our Esteemed Beloved ) which ( first of all ) brought forth its thin shoot , then made it powerful and strong and then it thickened and stood straight on its stalk . ( And when it flourished , bloomed and danced ) it delighted and charmed the cultivators . ( Allah has , likewise , made the Companions of His Beloved strong , grown up Trees of Faith , ) so that by means of them He may make the hearts of the disbelievers blaze up ( that burn in the jealousy of the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Those who believe and do pious works , Allah has promised them forgiveness and an immense reward .
O Believers ! Do not step ahead of Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in any matter ) and keep fearing Allah ( lest some discourtesy should occur displeasing the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
O Believers ! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and ( also ) do not speak to him so loud as you are loud when you speak to one another ( lest ) all your actions should come to nothing ( including your faith ) , and you are not even aware ( that your faith and all pious works have been wrecked ) .
Assuredly those who keep their voices low in the Presence of Allahs Messenger ( out of profound veneration and submissiveness ) , it is they whose hearts Allah has chosen for Godwariness and permeated with sincerity . For them alone is forgiveness and an immense reward .
Verily those who call out to you from outside your apartments , most of them do not have the understanding ( of your exalted station and incomparable status and polite manners of paying you most humble regards ) .
And if they had only been patient till you had come out to them , it would have been better for them . And Allah is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! If some wicked person brings you any news , inquire thoroughly into its truth ( lest ) you should cause ( undue ) harm to a people unknowingly , and later feel regret for what you have done .
And remember that the Messenger of Allah ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is among you . If he accepted what you say in most of the matters , you would be in serious trouble . But Allah has blessed you with the love of faith and has embelished it in your hearts and has made you hate disbelief , disobedience and sins . Such are they that follow the path of Din ( Religion ) resolutely and steadfastly .
( It ) is due to Allahs Bounty and Favour ( i . e . the raising of the untaught Messenger and his Presence among you ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And if two parties of the Muslims fight , make them reconcile . Then if either of these ( parties ) commits injustice and aggression against the other , fight against that ( party ) who are committing aggression till they turn to Allahs command . When they revert and submit , make peace between them with equity . And put justice to work . Surely Allah loves those who do justice .
The truth is that ( all ) believers are brothers ( to one another ) . So make peace between your two brothers and always fear Allah , so that you may be shown Mercy .
O Believers ! Let no community ridicule another community . It is likely that they may be better than those ( who ridicule ) . Nor should women make fun of other women . It is likely that they may be better than those ( who make fun ) . And do not offend or find fault with one another , nor call each other names . Calling someone wicked or indecent after ( he embraces ) faith is an extremely evil name . And those who do not turn to Allah in repentance it is they who are the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! Avoid most conjectures . Indeed some conjectures are sins ( liable to punishment in the Hereafter ) . And spy not ( on someones unknown matters or secrets ) , nor backbite one another . Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother ? You would hate it . And fear Allah ( in all such matters ) . Indeed Allah is Ever - Returning , Ever - Merciful .
O people ! We created you from a male and a female , and ( divided ) you into ( large ) peoples and tribes , so that you might recognize one another . Surely the most honourable among you in the sight of Allah is he who fears Allah most . Certainly Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware .
The Bedouins say : We have believed . Say : You have not believed . Yes , rather say : We have accepted Islam . And the belief has not yet gone into your hearts . If you obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , He will not decrease anything ( in reward ) for your deeds . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The true believers are only those who have believed in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and then never get into doubt , and who fight in the way of Allah with their material as well as human resources . It is they who are true ( in their claim to believe ) .
Say : Are you trying to show off to Allah your Din ( Religion ) while Allah knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth ? And Allah is Well Aware of everything .
These people are showing off to you that they have done a favour to you by embracing Islam . Say : Do not show off your Islam as a favour to me . Instead , Allah is the One Who favours you by guiding you to faith provided you are true ( to belief ) .
Surely Allah knows all the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and Allah monitors best whatever you do .
/ 20 / 2009Qaf . ( Only Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) know the real meaning . ) By the Glorious Quran .
But they wondered that a Warner had come to them from among themselves . So the disbelievers say : This is strange !
Is it that when we are dead and have become dust ( then we shall become alive again ) ? This return is far ( from understanding and perception ) .
Definitely We know how much the earth ( eats up and ) consumes their ( bodies ) and We have a Book wherein everything is preserved .
But ( strange and far from understanding is this that ) they denied the Truth ( i . e . the Messenger and the Quran ) when it came to them . So they have themselves stepped into anxiety and confusion .
Have they not looked at the sky above them how We made it and ( how ) adorned it , and there is no crack in it ?
And ( in the same way ) We spread out the earth and We placed in it heavy mountains and produced in it every kind of beautiful plants .
All that is ( a source of ) insight , direction and guidance for every servant who turns ( to Allah in repentance ) .
And We showered blessed water from the sky and then produced with it gardens and ( also ) the grain of harvests .
And date - palms soaring high with layers of spathes .
( This all is done as ) sustenance for the servants and We gave life with this ( water ) to the dead earth . In like manner is ( your ) coming forth from the graves .
Before these ( disbelievers of Makka ) the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and the People of the blind well ( ar - Rass in al - Yamama ) , and Thamud ( the People of Salih , in the town of al - Hijr near Tabuk on the Madina - Syria road ) .
And Ad ( the people of Hud in Ahqaf valley of Yemen situated between Oman and the al - Mahra ) and Pharaoh ( the ruler of Egypt ) and the People of Lut [ Lot ] ( living in Sodom and Amura [ Gomorrah ] in Palestine ) .
And the inhabitants of al - Aika ( the Wood in Madyan , the People of Shuaib ) and the people of Tubba ( the people of Asad Abu Kurib al - Himiri , the King of Yemen ) ( in sum ) all ( of them ) rejected the Messengers . So My promise of punishment ( against them ) proved true .
So are We tired by the first creation ? ( No way ! ) In fact it is they who are in doubt about the new creation .
Assuredly We created man and We know ( also ) the doubts which his ( ill - commanding ) self puts ( into his heart and mind ) . And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
When the two receivers receive ( the recording angels write down his every communication and work ) , sitting on the right and on the left .
Not a word does he utter with the mouth but a watcher is there beside him ready ( to write it ) .
And the stupor of death comes with the Truth . ( O man , ) that is what you were running away from !
And the Trumpet will be blown . It is this ( torment ) the Day of Warning .
And every soul will appear ( before Our Presence ) , one ( angel ) forcing it forward and ( the other ) a witness ( to its actions ) .
The truth is that you were negligent of this ( Day ) , so We have removed your veil ( of negligence ) and Today your sight is sharp .
And his close companion ( angel ) will say : That is what I have ready ( for you ) .
( It will be commanded : ) Both of you hurl into Hell every ( such ) ungrateful rebel .
Who hinders from good , exceeds the limits , doubts and puts into doubt .
Who had set up another god besides Allah . So hurl him into fierce torment .
( Now ) his ( other ) companion ( Satan ) will say : O our Lord , I did not misguide him . In fact he was himself suffering from misguidance of extreme degree .
Allah will say : Do not dispute in My Presence while I have already sent you the warning ( of punishment ) .
The Command is never changed in My Presence . And nor do I wrong the servants .
That Day We shall ask Hell : Are you filled up ? And it will say : Is there any more ?
And Paradise will be brought close to the pious ; it will not be distant at all .
( And it will be said to them : ) This is what you were promised ; ( it is meant ) for everyone who turns to Allah in repentance and who guards ( his Din [ Religion ] and Faith ) .
Who fears the Most Kind ( Lord ) unseen and comes ( before the Presence of Allah ) with a heart turned in repentance .
Enter it in peace ; this is the Day of Eternity .
All those blessings which they will long for will be there for them in that ( Paradise ) and there is still another blessing with Us ( or much more ; so the lovers will be enchanted ) .
And how many generations We destroyed before them ( the disbelievers and idolaters of Makka ) who were far stronger in power and might than they ! So they searched the cities ( of the world ) to run away somewhere for refuge ( from death or torment ) .
There is indeed sure warning and admonition in it for him who has a heart ( vigilant and awake , far from negligence , ) or listens with active attention ( i . e . focuses attention having no contact with anyone other than Allah ) and is in a state of ( spiritual ) vision ( i . e . remains lost in the effulgent disclosures of Allahs absolute beauty and charisma ) .
And surely We have created the heavens and the earth and that ( universe ) which is between the two in six periods and no fatigue has touched Us .
So be patient with what they say and glorify your Lord with praise before sunrise and before sunset .
And also glorify Him during some hours of the night and after the Prayers as well .
And listen attentively ( of the Day ) when a caller will call from a near place .
The Day when people will assuredly hear a mighty roar . That will be the Day of coming out from the graves .
Surely it is We Who give life and it is We Who cause death and to Us is the return .
The Day when the earth will split apart from above them , they will come out in haste . This raising them alive ( i . e . gathering the people once again ) is quite easy for Us .
We know best what they say and you are not the one to coerce them . So advise by means of the Quran anyone who fears My threat of punishment .
By the winds that blow and scatter .
And by the clouds that carry a heavy load ( of water ) .
And by the vessels that float with elegance .
And by the angels that distribute work .
Surely the promise ( of the Hereafter ) being made to you is absolutely true .
And surely the reward and the punishment ( of actions ) are bound to take place .
And by the heaven with its galaxies and orbits ( of stars and planets ) .
Certainly you are ( caught ) in inconsistent statements .
He alone turns away ( from the Holy Messenger and the Quran ) who is turned away ( from the knowledge of pre - eternity ) .
Ruined are those who tell lies out of assumption and conjecture .
Those who are oblivious ( of the Hereafter ) due to negligence and ignorance .
They ask : When is the Day of Requital ?
( Say : ) The Day ( when ) they will be roasted in the Fire of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) Relish your punishment . It is this punishment which you seek to hasten .
Surely the pious will be ( rejoicing ) in gardens and springs .
Receiving those blessings ( in ecstatic delight ) which their Lord will be giving them ( with munificence and benevolence ) . Surely it is they who were people of spiritual excellence ( in their life ) before this .
They used to sleep at night only for a short while .
And used to ( get up and ) seek forgiveness in the later part of the night .
And in their wealth was appointed a due share for the beggars and the destitute ( i . e . all the needy ) .
And there are many Signs in the earth for the people with the truth of certitude ( i . e . people of perfect certitude ) .
And in your selves ( as well ) . So do you not notice ?
And ( also ) there is sustenance for you in the heaven and ( all that too ) which you are promised .
So , by the King of heavens and the earth , this ( promise of Ours ) is true just as is your speech . ( You firmly believe in what you utter . )
Has the news come to you of the venerable guests of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) ?
When those ( angels ) came to him they wished him peace ; Ibrahim ( Abraham ) also said ( in reply ) : Peace ( be upon you ) ! ( and thought in his mind that ) they were strangers .
Then he went to his home in haste and brought a healthy roasted calf .
Then he presented it to them and said : Will you not eat ?
Then he felt somewhat concerned about them ( when they did not eat ) . They ( angels ) said : Do not worry , then they gave him the news about a son possessing knowledge and wisdom ( Ishaq [ Isaac ] ) .
Then his wife ( Sara ) came with a voice laden with wonder and frustration , patted her forehead in astonishment and said : ( Will ) an old and barren woman ( give birth to a child ) ?
The ( angels ) said : It will happen exactly as your Lord has said ; surely He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : O deputed angels , what is your basic intent ( of coming , apart from this good news ) ?
They said : We have been sent to the evildoing people ( the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So that we may rain on them stones of baked clay .
( The stones ) that have been marked from your Lord for those who transgress .
Then We moved everyone who was of the believers in it out ( from the town of the People of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So We did not find in that town ( any house ) of the Muslims except one ( in which were the Prophet Lut [ Lot ] and his two daughters ) .
And We made in that ( town ) a Sign to subsist ( as a lesson of warning ) for those who fear the grievous torment .
And ( there are Signs ) in ( the incident of ) Musa ( Moses ) as well when We sent him to Pharaoh with clear proof .
He turned away along with his cabinet members and said : ( Here is ) a magician or a madman .
Then We seized him and his army ( with torment ) , and drowned them ( all ) in the river . And he was but the perpetrator of condemnable works .
And there is ( a Sign ) in ( the destruction of ) the people of Ad too , when We sent upon them a wind devoid of any good and blessing .
Whatever it passed over , it did not leave without turning it to dust .
And also there is ( a Sign of warning ) in the ( destruction of ) the people of Thamud when they were told : Take benefit for an appointed term .
But they disobeyed the Command of their Lord . So a horrifying thunder seized them , and they could only stare it stunned .
Then they could neither gather strength to stand , nor could they take revenge ( on Us ) .
And ( We also destroyed ) the People of Nuh ( Noah ) before this . Surely they were a people extremely disobedient .
And We built the heavenly universe with great might . And surely We are expanding ( this universe ) more and more .
And We alone made ( the surface of the ) earth a ( livable ) floor . So how graciously We make up and spread out !
And of everything We have created two pairs so that you might concentrate and understand .
So run towards Allah . Surely I am a clear Warner to you from Him .
And do not set up any god apart from Allah . Surely I am a clear Warner to you from Him .
Likewise no Messenger came to those before them but they said the same : ( This is ) a magician or a madman .
Were they transmitting this advice to one another ? In truth they were ( all ) a disobedient and rebellious people .
So turn away your kind and caring looks from them . There is no blame on you ( for their disbelief ) .
And keep giving direction and guidance , for direction and guidance surely benefits the believers .
And I created the jinn and human beings solely to adopt My servitude .
I do not ask for any sustenance ( i . e . earning ) from them , nor do I require that they should feed Me .
Truly Allah alone is the Sustainer of everyone , the Lord of Great Might , the Most Strong . ( He does not need anyones help and assistance . )
So there is a fixed share of the torment for these wrongdoers ( too ) like the share of the torment of their companions ( who have passed before ) . So let them not ask Me to hasten ( it ) .
So a terrible destruction awaits the disbelievers on that Day of theirs which they have been promised .
By the ( Mountain ) at - Tur .
And by the Book inscribed .
( Which is ) on an Unfolded Scroll .
And by the House populated ( by the angels i . e . Kaba in heaven ) .
And by the Lofty Roof ( i . e . High Heaven or the Most Exalted Throne ) .
And by the swelling sea !
Surely the torment of your Lord will certainly take place .
No one can avert it .
The Day when the heaven will shake with a terrible tremor .
And the mountains ( leaving their locations ) will fly fast ( like clouds ) and scatter ( like dust particles ) .
So on that Day woe to those who belie .
Those who are playing a game of negligence , rapt in falsehood ( absurdity ) .
The Day when they will be forcefully pushed towards the Fire of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) This is the Fire of Hell you used to belie .
So is it magic or do you not see ?
Enter it . Then it is all the same for you whether you observe patience or you do not observe patience . You will be paid only for those deeds which you used to do .
Surely the Godfearing people will be in the Gardens and Bliss .
They will be delighted at and rejoicing in the ( bestowals ) their Lord will have blessed them with . And their Lord will keep them safe from the punishment of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) Relish food and drink as reward of the ( pious ) deeds which you used to do .
They will be reclining ( sitting ) on couches arranged in rows and We will marry them to maidens with fair colour ( and ) fascinating eyes .
And those who believe and their children follow them in faith , We shall unite their children also with them ( in the ranks of Paradise even if their actions would not fall in that grade . It would be in the honour of their pious fathers ) . And We will also not reduce anyway the reward of the actions of their ( pious fathers . Besides this , ) everyone will be held in ( reward and punishment of ) his own works .
And We will keep giving them fruits and meat more and more as they desire .
There , they will take the cups ( of holy drink ) by grabbing . This ( holy drink of Paradise ) will be free of foolish talk and sinful acts .
And ( the serving ) youths will go round them , as if they were pearls kept hidden in covers .
And they will turn to one another enquiring well - being .
They will say : Surely before this we used to live in fear ( of Allahs torment ) in our homes .
So Allah has been Gracious to favour us and has saved us from the punishment of the Fire of Hell .
Indeed we used to worship Him alone beforehand . Surely He is Most Gracious , Ever - Merciful .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) continue to admonish ( them ) . By the grace and blessing of your Lord you are neither a soothsayer ( i . e . the one who gives news through the jinn ) nor a madman .
Do the disbelievers say : ( He is ) a poet for whom we look forward to some temporal disasters ?
Say : Wait on , I am also waiting together with you ( for your destruction ) .
Do their mental faculties suggest them this ( foolishness ) or are they rioters and rebels ?
Or do they say : He ( the Messenger ) has invented it ( the Quran ) himself ? ( No indeed ; ) rather they simply do not believe ( in the Truth ) .
So let them produce a treatise like this ( Quran ) if they are truthful .
Have they been created by nothing or are they themselves the creators ?
Or did they create the heavens and the earth themselves ? ( No indeed ; ) in fact they do not have any faith ( in the Truth ) .
Or do they own the treasures of your Lord ? Or are they guards and watchmen over them ?
Or do they have any ladder ( by which they ascend ) and listen stealthily ( to the heaven ) ? So let the listener among them bring the clear proof .
Are there daughters for Him ( the Lord ) and sons for you ?
Do you ask them for wages that they are weighed down with debt ?
Do they have ( the knowledge of ) the unseen that they write down ?
Do they seek to deceive ( you ) by trick ? Those who disbelieve are being caught in their own trap .
Do they have any god other than Allah ? Glory be to Allah , above all what they set up as a partner ( with Allah ) .
And if they see a fragment of the sky falling ( on them , even then ) they will say : It is a layered ( thick ) cloud .
So leave them ( in their plight ) till they meet that Day of theirs when they will be destroyed .
The Day when their plots will be of no use for them , nor will they be helped .
And for those who are committed to doing wrong , there is a torment for them besides this torment as well but most of them do not know .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , do not grieve over what they say ) . Wait patiently for the Command of your Lord . Surely you are ( at all times ) before Our eyes . And glorify your Lord with His praise whenever you stand forth .
And also glorify Him during the hours of the night and ( in later part of it ) when the stars fade out .
By the bright star ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) when ( he ascended during the Ascension Night in the twinkling of an eye and ) descended .
He who bestowed on you his companionship ( i . e . the Messenger , who made you his companions by blessing you with his companionship , ) has never lost his way , nor has he ( ever ) strayed from the right path .
He does not speak out of his ( own ) desire .
His speech is nothing but outright Revelation , which is sent to him .
( The Lord ) of Mighty Powers ( directly ) conferred on him ( perfect ) knowledge .
He Who is absolute beauty . Then He ( the Effulgence of Beauty ) decided to unveil ( Himself ) .
And he ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) was on the uppermost horizon ( of the realm of creation during the Ascension Night i . e . on the apex of the created cosmos ) .
Then He ( the Lord of Honour ) drew closer ( to His Beloved Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , and then drew even closer .
Then a distance measuring only two bow - lengths was left ( between Allah Unveiled and His Esteemed Beloved ) or even less than that ( in extreme nearness ) .
So ( on that station of nearness and union ) He ( Allah ) revealed to His ( Beloved ) servant whatever He revealed .
( His ) heart did not take it contrary to what ( his ) eyes beheld .
Do you argue with him about what he saw ?
And assuredly he saw Him ( Allah Unveiled ) the second time ( again and you argue only about seeing Him once ) .
At the farthest Lote - Tree Sidrat al - Muntaha .
Adjacent to that is the Eternal Paradise - Jannat al - Mawa .
When theophanies ( i . e . Effulgent Disclosures ) of the Divine Light wrapped up as - Sidra ( the Lote - Tree at the Far End ) , covering it expansively .
And his eye neither inclined aside nor overstepped the limit ; ( it gazed in ecstasy at Whom it was to gaze ) .
Surely he saw the Greatest Signs of His Lord ( during the Ascension Night ) .
Have you taken a look at ( the goddesses ) Lat and Uzza ?
And ( have you ) also ( seen thoughtfully ) another , that third one ( goddess ) Manat ? ( Have you declared them daughters of Allah ? )
( O idolaters ! ) Are sons for you and daughters for Him ( Allah ) ?
( If your concept is correct ) then that division is serious injustice .
But ( the truth is that ) these ( idols ) are nothing but mere names which you and your fathers have given . Allah has not sent down any authority for them . They follow only whims and suspicions and the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves whereas Guidance has already come to them from their Lord .
Is ( all ) that available for man what he longs for ` ?
So Allah alone is the Master of the Hereafter and the world .
And how many angels there are in the heavens ( whom the disbelievers and the idolaters worship and expect from them intercession but ) whose intercession will be of no use at all , except after Allah ( awards ) permission for whom He wills and likes !
Surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter give the angels female names .
And they know nothing about it . They follow only assumption and surely assumption serves no purpose in comparison with certitude .
So divert your attention from him who turns away from Our Remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
That is but the limit of the working of their knowledge . Verily your Lord fully knows him who has strayed from His path and ( also ) knows best him who has attained guidance .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth so that He recompenses the acts of those who have committed vices and gives good reward to those who have performed virtues .
Those who guard against grave sins and indecencies excepting small sins ( and omissions ) , surely your Lord has vast prospects of forgiveness ( for them ) . He knows you best when He originated your life and nourishment from the earth ( i . e . soil ) and when you were embryos ( conceived ) in your mothers wombs . So never pose yourselves as clean and pure ; He knows best who is ( really ) pious .
Have you seen him who has turned away ( from the Truth ) ?
And he gave away a little ( wealth in the way of Allah ) and ( then ) held back ( his hand ) ?
Does he have the knowledge of the unseen that he can see ?
Has he not been given the knowledge of ( matters ) mentioned in the scriptures of Musa ( Moses ) .
And in the ( scriptures ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who accomplished ( all the Commands of Allah ) with perfection ?
That no bearer of a burden will carry the burden of ( the sins ) of another .
And that man ( according to justice ) will get only that for which he will have strived . ( As for Bounty , no one has any right to it . That is merely Allahs bestowal and pleasure , granting as much as He wills to whom He may please . )
And that all his endeavours will soon be shown ( i . e . exposed ) .
Then he will be given full reward ( for all his endeavours ) .
And that ( ultimately all ) have to return to your Lord .
And that He is the One Who makes one laugh ( granting delight ) and makes one weep ( granting grief ) .
And that He is the One Who causes death and gives life .
And that He is the One Who has created the two genders , male and female .
Out of a ( sperm ) drop when it is ejaculated ( into the mothers womb ) .
And that it is upon Him alone to raise up alive ( also after death ) .
And that He is the One Who makes self - sufficient ( by providing according to needs ) and He is the One Who enriches treasures ( by giving surplus to the needs ) .
And that He alone is the Lord of Sirius ( a star that was worshipped in the days of ignorance ) .
And that He is the One Who destroyed the first ( people of ) Ad .
And ( the people of ) Thamud ( as well ) . Then he did not spare ( anyone of them ) to survive .
And before that He destroyed the people of Nuh ( Noah as well ) . Surely they were extremely wicked and exceedingly defiant .
And He is the One Who ( raised up ) the overturned towns ( of the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) and smashed them down .
Then that covered them which did cover ( i . e . the stones were rained on them ) .
So , ( O man , ) which of the favours of your Lord will you doubt ?
This ( Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) is also a Warner of the Warners of old .
The imminent ( Hour of Judgment ) has drawn near .
No one except Allah can bring it forth ( and establish ) .
So do you wonder at this Revelation ?
And do you laugh and not weep .
While you are busy playing a game ( of negligence ) ?
So prostrate yourselves before Allah and worship ( Him ) .
The Last Hour has drawn near and the moon has split into two .
And if they ( the disbelievers ) see a Sign ( miracle ) they turn their faces away and say : This is the powerful magic ever running down through ages .
And they have rejected ( the Truth even now ) and followed their vain desires . And everything ( that has been promised ) is to take place at the appointed time .
And indeed the news has come to them ( of the earlier communities ) containing lessons of warning and admonition ( on disbelief and disobedience ) .
( This Quran ) is perfect intellect and reason . Are the Warners still not of any benefit ?
So turn your face away from them . The Day when the caller ( angel ) will call towards the most detestable thing ( the expanse of the last assembly ) .
With eyes cast down , they will come out of their graves like scattered locusts .
Rushing towards the caller running . The disbelievers would say : This is a very hard Day .
The People of Nuh ( Noah ) also denied before this . So they belied Our servant ( Nuh Noah , the Messenger ) and said : ( He ) is mad . And he was given threats .
So he prayed to his Lord : I am powerless ( before the transgressions of my people ) so exact revenge .
Then We opened the gates of heaven with torrential rain .
And We burst springs from the earth . So the water ( of the earth and the heaven ) collected for the same purpose that had been decreed already ( for their destruction ) .
And We carried him ( Nuh Noah ) in the ( Ark ) built with planks and nails .
Which floated before Our eyes ( under Our security . All this ) was done to exact revenge for him Nuh ( Noah ) who was rejected .
And surely We made ( the ruins of the Deluge ) subsist as a Sign . So is there anyone who will think ( and take advice ) ?
So how My torment and My warning were !
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
( The people of ) Ad too rejected ( the Messengers ) . So how ( awful ) My torment ( upon them ) and My Warning were !
Surely We sent upon them a howling windstorm on a day of lasting evil ( in their favour ) .
That plucked out people as if they were uprooted stems of date - palms .
Then how ( awful ) My Torment and My Warning were !
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
( The people of ) Thamud also rejected the Warning Messengers .
So they said : Are we to follow a human being who is one of us ? Then we shall certainly run into error and insanity .
Has the direction and guidance ( Revelation ) been sent down to him alone out of all of us ? The truth is that he is a great liar , self - conceited ( and arrogant ) .
They will come to know tomorrow ( on the Day of Judgment ) who is a great liar and self - conceited ( and arrogant ) .
Indeed We are going to send a she - camel for them to test them . So , ( O Salih , ) wait for their ( end ) and continue observing patience .
Make it known to them that water has been divided between them ( and the she - camel ) . Everyone will be served with the share of water by his turn .
So they called one of their companions ( named Qidar ) . He attacked ( the she - camel with a sword ) and hamstrung her .
Then how ( awful ) My Torment and My Warning were !
Verily We sent upon them a terrible roar . So they became like a thatchers trampled stubble .
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
The People of Lut ( Lot ) also rejected the Warners .
Surely We sent a windstorm raining stones upon them except the family of Lut ( Lot ) . We saved them ( from the torment ) in the later part of the night .
With a special favour from Us . In the same way We give reward to him who gives thanks .
And no doubt Lut ( Lot ) warned them of Our seizure but , having doubts about his warnings , they denied .
And indeed they made up their minds to snatch from Lut ( Lot ) his guests . So We erased the structure of their eyes and stripped them of sight , then ( said to them : ) Taste My punishment and warning .
And surely the everlasting punishment reached them early in the morning .
Then ( it was said to them : ) Taste My punishment and warning .
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
And surely the Warners came to the People of Pharaoh ( as well ) .
They denied all Our Signs . Then We seized them with the seizure befitting the Glory of Almighty , All - Powerful .
( O Quraish of Makka ! ) Are your disbelievers better than the people ( before ) or has your salvation been written in the ( Revealed ) Books ?
Or do these ( disbelievers ) say : We are a strong party dominant ( over the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ?
Soon this party will be defeated ( in the battlefield of Badr ) and they will flee away turning their backs .
But their ( actual ) promise is the Last Hour and the Last Hour is extremely terrible and most agonizing .
Assuredly , the evildoers are in ( the fold of ) error and insanity ( or Fire ) .
The Day when they will be dragged into Hell on their faces , ( it will be said to them : ) Taste burning in Hell .
Surely We have created everything according to a fixed measure .
And Our Command comes into action once and for all as the twinkling of an eye .
And surely We destroyed ( many of ) your groups . So is there anyone who will take advice ?
And whatever they did is ( recorded ) in ( their ) Books of Deeds .
And every ( action ) small or big has been written .
Indeed the Godfearing will ( rejoice ) in gardens and streams .
And will ( be seated ) in special nearness to the Sovereign Lord of ( true ) Power during holy sessions .
The Most Compassionate ( is He ) .
Who ( Himself ) taught the Quran to ( the Arab Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
He is the One Who created ( this Absolutely Perfect ) man .
He alone taught him the art of expression and communication ( i . e . taught the True Messenger ma kana wa ma yakun )
The sun and the moon are rotating according to the configuration determined ( by Him ) .
And the herbs spread over the earth and all ( species of ) the trees prostrate themselves ( to Him alone ) .
And He is the One Who has maintained the sky raised high and ( He is the One ) Who has set up the balance ( for justice ) .
So that you violate not the balance while weighing .
And keep weighing justly and do not make the balance fall short .
He is the One Who has spread out the earth for the creatures .
There are fruits in it and blossom - bearing date - palms .
And chaff - covered grain and fragrant ( fruits ) blooms .
So , ( O assembly of jinn and men , ) which of your Lords blessings will you deny ?
He is the One Who created man from a dry mud sounding like earthenware .
And created the jinn from a flame of fire .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( He alone is ) the Lord of both the easts and ( He alone is ) the Lord of both the wests .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
He is the One Who has made the two seas flow that join each other .
There is a barrier between them ; they cannot breach ( their respective ) limits .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The pearls ( shading green ) and corals ( shading red ) come forth from both ( the seas ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( Under ) His ( control ) are ( also ) the big vessels with lofty sails raised high ( anchoring or sailing ) in the sea like mountains .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Whoever is on the earth will perish .
And the Essence of your Lord , Who is the Master of Glory and Splendour and the Master of Bounty and Honour will remain .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
All that are in the heavens and the earth beg from Him alone . Every moment His Glory manifests anew .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
O both the groups ( of men and jinn , ) soon shall We attend to your account .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
O company of the jinn and men ! If you have the power to go across the boundaries of the heaven and the earth ( and overpower the universe ) , then go ahead . Whichever station ( heavenly sphere ) you will go to , there too will be His Kingdom alone .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The flames of pure ( i . e . smokeless ) fire will be sent upon both of you and ( flameless ) smoke ( too will be sent ) and you both will be unable to escape from them .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And when heavens will split apart and will become rosy like burnt oil ( or red leather ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
That Day no man or jinn will be asked about his sin .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The evildoers will be recognized by the darkness of their faces and so they will be pulled , seized by their forelocks and feet .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( It will be said to them : ) It is this Hell which the evildoers used to deny .
They will move about in that ( Hell ) and in the boiling hot water .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And whoever fears standing before his Lord ( for Meeting ) , for him are two Gardens .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
They are ( green and fresh Gardens ) with deep thick branches .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Two springs are flowing in both of them .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them are two kinds of every fruit .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The residents of Paradise will be reclining on couches lined with fine and thick brocade ( i . e . satin ) and the fruits of both the Gardens will be hanging low ( over them ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And in them will be ( chaste maidens ) with downcast looks , untouched either by any man or by any jinn .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
As if they ( chaste maidens ) were rubies and pearls .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The reward of good cannot be anything but good .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And apart from these two there are also two more gardens ( for them ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Both appear deep green tinting black .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
There are two springs which will be gushing with force in these two ( as well ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them also there are fruits , date - palms and pomegranates .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them are pious and beautiful ( chaste maidens as well ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The maidens who are veiling , confined in tents .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Untouched before either by any man or jinn .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( The residents of Paradise ) will be ( sitting ) reclining on cushions over green carpets and rare and exquisite fine rugs .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Most Blessed is the Name of your Lord , the Master of Glory and Splendour and the Master of Bounty and Honour .
When what is to occur ( the Hour of Resurrection ) will occur .
There is no falsehood in its occurrence .
( That Hour ) will lower ( some ) and raise ( some others ) high .
When the earth will tremor and then shake violently .
And the mountains will be crumbled into bits .
Then will become dust particles spread in the air .
And you will be divided into three classes .
So ( first ) those on the Right Hand ; what a class will the Right Hand be !
And ( second ) those on the Left Hand ; ( in what miserable plight will be ) the Left Hand party !
And ( third ) the Excellent ; ( they ) are the foremost .
It is they who will be the Near Ones ( to Allah ) .
( They will live ) in the Gardens of Bliss .
A large group ( of these Near Ones ) will be from the earlier people .
And a small number ( among them ) will be from the later generations .
( These Near Ones ) will be on the thrones ornamented with gold .
Reclining there on cushions , face to face .
The serving youths rapt always in the same state of being will go round them .
( They will be attending ) carrying bowls , ewers and cups filled with ( transparent ) drink of ( nearness ) from the free - flowing springs .
By ( drinking ) this they will have neither headache nor derangement of senses ( and stupefaction ) .
And ( the servants of Paradise ) will be ( roaming about ) with fruits which ( the Near Ones ) will like .
And ( there will be ) bird - meat as well which they ( the Near Ones ) will desire .
And also ( in their companionship will be ) maidens with wide lovely eyes .
Like pearls kept hidden , well - guarded .
( That ) will be the reward of the ( pious ) works which they used to do .
There they will hear nothing absurd nor any word of sin .
But ( these people of Peace will hear ) only one thing ( from all sides : ) Peace , Peace .
And those of the Right Hand ; what a class the Right Hand are !
Amid thornless lote - trees .
And layers of banana fruit .
And long - stretching , ( wide - spreading ) shades .
And flowing , gushing waters .
And ( they will be rejoicing ) in abundance of fruits .
They will be neither exhausted nor restricted ( to eat ) .
And ( they ) will be ( staying ) on raised ( splendid ) floors .
Surely We have created these ( maidens ) as a special creation ( reflecting beauty and refinement ) .
Then We have made them virgins .
The ardently loving ( wives ) of the same age .
These ( maidens and other bounties ) are for those on the Right Hand .
A large group of them will be from the earlier people .
And from later generations ( also ) will be a large group ( among them ) .
And those of the Left Hand ; what ( an evil people ) on the Left Hand are !
They will be amid fierce hot wind of Hell and simmering water .
And under the shadow of black smoke .
That will neither ( ever ) cool nor be pleasing .
No doubt , these ( inmates of Hell ) lived luxuriously before this ( in the world ) .
And obstinately persisted in great sin ( of denying Allah and setting up partners with Him ) .
And they used to say : When we are dead and become ( a heap of ) dust and ( decomposed bones ) , shall we then be raised up ( alive again ) ?
And shall our ancestors too ( be given life ) ?
Say : Indeed the earlier and the later .
( All of them ) will be gathered together on a fixed Hour of an appointed Day .
Then surely , O strayed people , deniers .
You will certainly eat of thorny ( cactus ) tree .
And will fill your stomachs with it .
And ( you ) will drink boiling water over it .
Drinking as a thirst - stricken camel drinks .
This will be their feast on the Day of Resurrection .
It is We Who created you then why do you not confirm ( resurrection ) ?
Well , give your view : the semen ( sperm drop ) that you ejaculate ( into the womb )
So is it you who create ( a human being ) from it or are We the Creator ?
It is We Who have decreed death among you and We are not helpless either ( to bring you back to life after this ) .
Nor are We ( powerless ) to change others into the like of you in your place and make you grow into a form which you do not know .
And surely you have learnt ( the reality of ) the first creation . Then why do you not accept advice ?
Well , give your view : the ( seed ) that you cultivate
So is it you who make ( the crop ) grow from it or are We its Grower ?
If We so intend We would crumble it to pieces . Then you would only be struck with awe and shame !
( And you may say : ) We are punished with ransom .
Rather we are seized by misfortune .
Well , give your view : the water that you drink
Have you sent it down from the cloud or are We its Sender ?
If We will , We can make it bitter . Then why do you not give thanks ?
Well , give your view : the fire that you kindle
Have you grown its tree or are We its Grower ?
It is We Who have made it ( the fire of tree ) a reminder ( of the Fire of Hell , an admonition and a warning ) and a source of profit and comfort for the travellers of forests .
So always glorify the Name of your Lord , Most Magnificent .
So I swear by the places where different portions of the Quran descend ( on the Arab Messenger ) .
And this is a mighty oath if you realize .
Surely this is a Glorious Quran ( which is being sent down on the most Glorious Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
It has been ( inscribed ) on al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ( the Preserved Tablet ) before this .
No one can touch it except the purified ( cleansed ) ones .
It has been sent down by the Lord of all the worlds .
So is it this Revelation that you disdain ?
And you have made your means of subsistence ( and fortune ) to reject it !
Then why do you not ( make the soul return ) when it reaches the throat ( to pass away ) ?
And at that moment , you do nothing but helplessly look on !
And We are nearer to him ( the dying one ) than you but you do not see ( Us ) .
Then if you are under no ones command and control , why do you not ( do this ) .
That you turn that soul back if you are truthful ?
Then if he ( who died ) was of the Near Ones .
For him is Paradise packed with bounties , pleasure and delight and spiritual sustenance and comforts .
And if he was of those on the Right Hand .
Then ( it will be said to him : ) Peace for you from those on the Right Hand . ( Or , O Prophet , peace on you from those on the Right Hand . )
But if he ( who died ) was of the strayed beliers .
Then he will be entertained with scalding boiling water .
And his ( end ) is the admission to Hell .
Assuredly this is the absolute Truth of Certitude .
So always glorify the Name of your Lord , Most Magnificent .
All those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah alone and only He is the Lord of Honour , Most Wise .
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . He is the One Who gives life and causes death , and He wields Absolute Power over everything .
He is the One Who is the First ( of all ) and the Last ( of all ) . And He is Manifest ( as for His Power ) and Hidden ( as goes His Essence ) . And He knows everything full well .
He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods , then unveiled His Might taking the Throne of Authority of the Universe ( i . e . organized the whole universe under His Command befitting His Glory ) . He knows what goes into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends ( or comes forth ) from the heavenly bodies or what ascends to ( or goes into ) them . Wherever you are He is with you . And Allah monitors best what you do .
His is the entire kingdom of the heavens and the earth and to Him are returned all the affairs .
He is the One Who makes the night pass into the day and the day pass into the night . And He is also Well Aware of the ( hidden ) contents of the hearts .
Believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and spend ( in His cause ) out of that ( wealth ) in which He has made you His vicegerents ( and trustees ) . So those of you who believe and spend ( in His Way ) for them is mighty reward .
And what is the matter with you that you do not believe in Allah while the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is giving you the call to believe in your Lord ? And surely Allah has already taken a firm covenant from you if you are the believers .
He is the One Who sends down clear Signs to His ( exalted ) servant so that He may bring you out of darkness into the light . Surely Allah is the Most Clement , Ever - Merciful towards you .
And what is the matter with you that you do not spend in the Way of Allah whereas the ownership of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone ( you are merely His vicegerents ) ? Those of you who spent ( their wealth in the Way of Allah before Makkan Victory ) and fought , they ( and you ) cannot be equal . They are far higher in rank than those who spent their wealth afterwards and fought . But Allah has promised the most pleasing end ( i . e . Paradise ) to all in the Hereafter . And Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
Who will make a good loan to Allah so that He may increase it ( the loan ) for him manifold ? And a generous reward awaits him .
( O Beloved ! ) The Day when you will see the believing men and the believing women ( of your Umma [ Community ] ) with their light heading fast in front of them and on their right , ( it will be said to them : ) Good news to you . Today there are Gardens for you with streams flowing under them . ( You ) will live in them forever . That is but a great success .
The Day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say to the believers : Look towards us ( also a little considerately ) so that we may take some of your light , it will be said to them : Go back and look for light ( there where you used to deny light ) . So a wall will be raised between them ( just then ) with a door in it . Inside it will be mercy and outside it will be torment from that direction .
They ( the hypocrites ) will call out those ( believers ) , saying : Were we not in your company ( in the world ) ? They will say : Yes indeed ! But you troubled yourselves with the disruption ( of hypocrisy ) and used to wait ( for our woe and destruction ) . And you doubted ( the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and Din [ Religion of Islam ] ) and your false hopes deceived you till the command of Allah ( death ) reached and the Arch - Deceiver ( Satan ) kept deluding you about Allah .
So today , ( O hypocrites , ) no recompense will be accepted from you or from those who disbelieved . Hell is the abode for you ( all ) . And it is this ( abode ) which is your mawla ( i . e . companion ) . And quite an evil resort is that , ( because you denied accepting those as mawla from whom the charity of the light of faith and forgiveness is obtained ) .
Has the time not ( yet ) come for the believers that their hearts get humbled with tenderness for the remembrance of Allah , and for that Truth ( as well ) which has been sent down , and that they do not become like those who were given the Book before this , then a long time passed over them and their hearts hardened ? And many of them are disobedient .
Know that Allah alone brings the earth to life after it is dead . And surely We have made Signs clear for you so that you may put your reason to work .
Surely both the men and the women who give charity and those who lend a goodly loan to Allah , the ( reward of charity ) will be increased for them manifold , and there shall be most honourable reward for them .
And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers are as - Siddiqun ( the Champions of Truth ) and ash - Shuhada ( the Faithful Witnesses ) in the sight of their Lord . For them is their reward and their light ( as well ) , and those who disbelieved and denied Our Revelations it is they who are the inmates of Hell .
Know that the life of the world is nothing but a sport and pastime , and superficial beauty , and mutual boasting and self - praise , and ambition to excel in wealth and children over one another . Its similitude is rain whose produce pleases the farmers . Then it dries up . Then you see it turning yellow and then it becomes bits of stubble . And there is severe torment ( for the disobedient ) in the Hereafter and forgiveness and great pleasure from Allah ( for the obedient ) . And the life of the world is nothing but belongings that deceive .
( O servants ! ) Race in pursuit of forgiveness from your Lord and towards Paradise ( also ) which is as wide as the vast expanse of the heaven and the earth , prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers . This is Allahs Bounty which He gives to whom He wills . And Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty .
No calamity occurs in the earth or in your lives but it is in a Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz , the station of Allahs pre - eternal knowledge , ) before We make it happen . Surely this ( all - encompassing and perfect knowledge ) is very easy for Allah .
So that you may not grieve over what goes out of your hands , nor gloat in pride over what He grants you . And Allah does not like anyone arrogant and proud
They who are ( themselves ) miserly and ( also ) urge others to be miserly . And he who turns away from ( Allahs Injunctions ) , then surely Allah is ( also ) Self - Sufficient , Most Praiseworthy .
Verily We sent Our Messengers with clear Signs and We sent down with them the Book and the Balance of Justice so that people may grow firm and stable in justice . And ( of minerals ) We brought forth iron in which is fierce force ( for weapons and defence ) and which has ( multiple other ) benefits for people ( in industrial development ) . And ( the purpose is ) that Allah may bring to light who helps Him and His Messengers ( i . e . Din [ Religion of Islam ] ) without seeing . Surely Allah is ( Himself ) the All - Powerful , the Almighty .
And indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and We placed Prophethood and the Revealed Book among their children . So ( some ) of them are rightly guided and most of them are disobedient .
Then in the footsteps of these Messengers we sent ( other ) Messengers and We sent Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) after them and gave him the Injil ( the Gospel ) . And We created kindness and mercy in the hearts of those who were ( the true ) followers ( of Isa [ Jesus ] ) . And they themselves invented the innovation of monasticism ( living the life of a recluse and committing to asceticism and austerity ) . We did not prescribe it for them . But they ( introduced this innovation of monasticism ) merely to seek Allahs pleasure . Then they could not practically keep and maintain that check which was its due ( i . e . could not continue its spirit and discipline ) . So We paid those of them their reward who believed ( and continued the innovation of monasticism to seek the pleasure of Allah ) . And most of them ( who left it and changed their ways ) are disobedient .
O Believers ! Become Godfearing and believe in His ( Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . He will bless you with two portions of His Mercy and will bring about light for you to walk in ( in the world and in the Hereafter ) and will forgive you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( The purpose of this exposition is ) that the People of the Book may know that they have no control over Allahs Bounty and that the entire Bounty is in the Mighty Hand of Allah alone . He gives it to whom He likes and Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty , Most Great .
Indeed Allah has heard the words of the woman who was arguing with you about her husband and was pleading with Allah . And Allah was hearing the mutual questions and answers of both of you . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Those of you who separate their wives by Zihar ( i . e . they say to their wives : You are to me as my mothers back . But by saying this ) they do not become their mothers . Their mothers are only those who have given them birth . And no doubt they utter evil and false words . Surely Allah is Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And those who separate their wives by Zihar but then seek to go back on what they have said , setting free a neck ( a slave or a slave girl ) is obligatory before they touch each other . This is what you are admonished . And Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
But the one who does not find ( a slave or a slave girl ) must fast for two consecutive months ( as an obligation ) before they touch each other . Then someone who is unable to do that must feed sixty poor people ( under obligation ) . That is in order that you may keep your belief in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And these are the limits ( set by ) Allah . And there is a painful punishment for the disbelievers .
Indeed those who maintain rivalry against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] will be humiliated as those before them were humiliated . And surely We have sent down clear Revelations and there is humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
On the Day when Allah will raise them up ( giving life again ) , He will then inform them of their actions . Allah has counted up ( their ) every action while they have forgotten it . And Allah is Witness over ( and Well Aware of ) everything .
( O man ! ) Do you not know that Allah knows all those things which are in the heavens and in the earth ? There is no whisper of three ( men ) anywhere but He is their fourth ( with His all - encompassing knowledge and awareness ) . Nor is there any whisper of five ( men ) but He is the sixth of them ( with His all - encompassing knowledge ) . Nor of less or more than that but He is ( always ) with them wherever they are . Then on the Day of Rising He will alert them to the actions that they used to do . Surely Allah knows everything full well .
Have you not seen those who were forbidden to whisper ? Then they started doing the same that they were forbidden to do . And they whisper about sin and revolt and disobedience to the ( Holy ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and when they come to your presence they greet you with the ( unbecoming ) words with which Allah has not greeted you and say in their hearts : ( If this Messenger is truthful then ) why Allah does not punish us for what we say ? ( The punishment of ) Hell is sufficient for them . They will enter it and it is an extremely evil abode .
O Believers ! When you whisper among yourselves , whisper not sin , injustice , revolt and disobedience to the Holy Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) ; but whisper piety and Godwariness and keep fearing Allah towards Whom you all will be gathered .
( Negative and destructive ) whispering is ( employed ) by Satan alone so that he may cause anguish to the believers . But in truth he ( Satan ) cannot do any harm to them ( the believers ) except by Allahs command . And the believers should trust but Allah alone .
O Believers ! When it is said to you : Open up and make room in your gatherings , then open up and make room . Allah will provide you with ample room . And when it is said : Rise up , then rise up . Allah will raise those in ranks who believe from amongst you and who are given knowledge . And Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
O Believers ! When you seek to submit some secret to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in private , give something in charity before you submit your secret . This ( action ) is better and purer for you . But if you do not find anything ( to offer in charity ) , then Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Are you worried about donating in charity before your submission to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in secret ? So when you did not do ( that ) and Allah lifted from you probe ( i . e . relaxed this restriction ) , then establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) persistently . And Allah is Well Aware of all the deeds that you do .
Have you not seen those who make friends with such a party upon whom Allah sent wrath ? They are neither of you nor of them and take false oaths while they know .
Allah has prepared for them severe punishment . Indeed it is an evil ( work ) what they are doing .
They have made their ( false ) oaths a shield . So they hinder ( others ) from the way of Allah . Consequently there is a humiliating punishment for them .
Neither their wealth nor their children will ever be able to save them from ( the punishment of ) Allah . It is they who are the inmates of Hell . They will live in it forever .
The Day when Allah will raise up all of them ( giving life a second time ) they will swear to Him ( as well ) as they swear to you . And they assume that they are on a ( right ) thing ( i . e . path ) . Beware ! They are liars .
Satan has gained mastery over them . So he has made them forget the remembrance of Allah . It is they who are Satans army . Know that indeed it is the party of Satan who are the losers .
Surely those who maintain enmity against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , it is they who are of the lowest of mankind .
Allah has destined : Most certainly I and My Messengers will dominate . Surely Allah is Most Strong , Almighty .
You will never find those who believe in Allah and the Day of Rising making friends with anyone who is hostile to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , even though they are their fathers ( and forefathers ) or their sons ( and grandsons ) or their brothers or their near relatives . It is they in whose hearts Allah has inscribed faith and has strengthened them with His spirit ( i . e . special spiritual benefit ) . And He will admit them to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Allah . It is they who are the Party of ( the devotees of ) Allah . Remember ! It is the Party of ( the devotees of ) Allah that attain to the goal .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) glorify Allah and He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
He is the One Who collected the disbelievers from among the People of the Book ( i . e . the tribe of Banu Nadir ) from their houses and banished them the first time ( from Madina towards Syria ) . You did not ( even ) think that they would go away and they thought that their strong fortresses would save them from ( the seizure of ) Allah . Then ( the torment of ) Allah came upon them from where they could not ( even ) imagine . And He ( Allah ) cast terror into their hearts ( and thus ) they ruined their houses with their own hands and the believers hands . So , learn a lesson ( from it ) , O people of vision !
And had Allah not written exile for them He would have tormented them ( more severely ) in the world . And there is for them the punishment of Hell in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
It happened because they posed extreme enmity against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . ( Their ringleader was Kab ibn Ashraf , a notorious denigrator of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . ) And he who opposes Allah ( and His Messenger ) then Allah is Severe in punishment .
( O Believers ! ) The palm - trees that you cut down or left standing upon their roots , ( during the siege of Banu Nadir tribe all this ) was done by Allahs Command so that He might humiliate and disgrace the disobedient .
And whatever spoils ( materials of fai - the spoils ) Allah restored to His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] taking out ) from them , you galloped neither horses nor camels in ( procuring ) them . Yes indeed ! Allah gives dominance and control to His Messengers over anyone He wills . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And whatever ( materials of fai spoils ) Allah restored to His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] taking out ) from the people of ( the towns captured without war in addition to those of Quraiza , Nadir , Fadak , Khaibar and Uraina ) belong to Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and ( the Messengers ) near relatives ( i . e . Banu Hashim and Banu Abd al - Muttalib ) and the orphans , the needy and the wayfarer ( of society at large . This distribution system is to ensure ) that ( the whole wealth ) may not circulate ( only ) among the rich of you ( but should circulate among all the classes of society ) . And whatever the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) awards you , take that and whatever he forbids you , abstain ( from that ) and keep fearing Allah ( i . e . never scoff at the Messengers distribution and award ) . Surely Allah is Severe to punish .
( The fore - mentioned fai materials ) are ( also ) for the poor emigrants who are driven out of their houses and possessions ( and properties ) . They seek Allahs bounty and His favour and pleasure . And they help Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] by sacrificing their possessions and homeland ) . It is they who are true believers .
( These spoils are for those Ansar as well ) who had taken the city ( of Madina ) and the faith as their home before ( the emigrants came ) . They love those who have come to them as emigrants , and do not feel any need ( or prick of jealousy ) in their hearts pertaining to that ( wealth ) which is given to the emigrants and prefer them to themselves even though they may themselves be in dire need . And he who is saved from the miserliness of his ( ill - commanding ) self , it is they who are successful and victorious .
And those ( too ) who came after these ( emigrants and the Ansar and ) submit : O our Lord , forgive us and our brothers who have taken the lead over us in embracing faith . And let not any spite and disgust be in our hearts against the believers . O our Lord , surely You are Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
Have you not seen the hypocrites who say to their brothers among the People of the Book who have become disbelievers : If you are driven out ( from here ) , we too will necessarily leave with you and will never obey anyone in your case , and if you are attacked , we will most certainly help you ? But Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars .
If they ( the disbelieving Jews ) are driven out ( from Madina ) , these ( hypocrites ) will never leave with them . Nor will they help them if they are put to fight . But if ( at all ) they do come to their help , they will for sure flee , turning their backs . Then they will not be helped ( from anywhere ) .
( O Muslims ! ) Indeed they have greater fear and terror of you in their hearts than Allahs . The reason is that they are the people who do not possess understanding .
They ( the Jews of Madina and the hypocrites ) will not be able to fight against you ( even ) allied , except in fortified towns or taking cover of walls . They fight hard ( but ) among themselves . You think they are united whereas their hearts are disunited . The reason is that they do not apply reason .
( Their plight ) resembles those who have tasted the evil consequences of their doings shortly before them ( i . e . the idolaters of Makka in Badr and Banu Nadir , Banu Qainuqa and Banu Quraiza of the Jews , etc . ) . And there is for them grievous punishment ( in the Hereafter as well ) .
( The example of hypocrites ) is like that of Satan when he says to man : Become a disbeliever , but when he disbelieves , he ( Satan ) says : I feel sick of you . Surely I fear Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
Then both of them will end up in Hell and will live in it forever . And that is indeed the punishment of the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! Keep fearing Allah . And everyone should be vigilant to what he has sent forward for tomorrow ( the Day of Reckoning ) . And always fear Allah . Indeed Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
And be not like those who forgot Allah . So Allah made them forget their own souls ( that they could send forward some good for their own souls ) . It is they who are defiant .
The inmates of Hell and the people of Paradise cannot be equal . It is the people of Paradise who are successful and victorious .
Had We sent down this Quran on some mountain then , ( O listener , ) you would certainly have seen it bowed , split and crushed to pieces for fear of Allah . And We give these examples for the people so that they may ponder .
Allah is He besides Whom there is no God : the Knower of the unseen and the seen . He alone is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
Allah is He apart from Whom there is no God : ( the Real ) King , the Most Pure of all shortcomings , Perfectly Free from all imperfections ( and the Bestower of Peace ) , the Giver of security and protection ( and the Attester of the Messengers by means of Miracles ) , the Guardian and Watchful , the Almighty and the Lord of Honour , the Lord of Great Majesty , the Supreme Authority and the Supremely Great . Glory be to Allah , far above all that they associate with Him .
Allah is He Who is the Creator , the One Who brings into existence from nothingness ( i . e . the Inventor ) , the Bestower of Form ; ( in short , ) all Beautiful Names belong to Him alone . All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him , the Lord of Honour , the Most Wise .
O Believers ! Do not make friends with My enemies and your enemies . You communicate to them information because of ( your ) friendship whereas they just deny the very Truth that has come to you . They drive out the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and you ( from your land ) because you believe in Allah , your Sustainer . If you have set out to fight in My Way ( for the uplift of noble cause ) and seek My pleasure ( then do not have friendship with them ) . You send them secret messages of friendship while I know best what you hide and what you make known . And whoever of you does this ( misdeed ) has deviated from the straight path .
Should they overmaster you then ( you will see ) they will be your open enemies . And they will extend their hands and tongues to you with evil design and will have the earnest desire that you disbelieve ( somehow ) .
Neither your ( disbelieving and polytheist ) kindred nor your ( disbelieving and polytheist ) children will be of any good to you on the Day of Resurrection . ( On that Day Allah will ) bring about complete separation between you : ( the believers will be sent to Paradise and the disbelievers to Hell ) . And Allah observes your doings well .
Indeed in Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and his companions there is an excellent example for you ( to follow ) , when he said to his people : We are utterly weary of ( and cut off from ) you and the idols that you worship apart from Allah ; we have openly rejected you all . The enmity , hatred and malice between us and you have become evident forever until you believe in Allah , the One . But Ibrahims ( Abrahams ) saying to his ( fostering ) father : I shall certainly pray for your forgiveness , ( was just a promise made to him well before , which he fulfilled and gave him a reminder as well saying : ) I do not possess anything for you before Allah ( owing to your disbelief and idol - worship . Then he separated from his people , praying : ) O our Lord , we put our trust in You alone and we turn in repentance to You alone and ( all ) have to return to You alone .
O our Lord ! Make us not a source of trial for the disbelievers ( i . e . give them not control over us ) and forgive us . O our Lord , surely You alone are the Almighty , the Lord of Honour , the Most Wise .
Indeed there is for you an excellent example in them ( to follow ) , for him ( in particular ) who hopes ( to appear before the Presence of ) Allah and looks forward to the Last Day . But whoever turns away then Allah is Self - Sufficient and Praiseworthy .
It may be that Allah brings about friendship ( at a later stage ) between you and those of them who are now your foes . And Allah is All - Powerful and Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah does not forbid you to be good to them and treat them with equity and justice who did not fight against you on ( the question of ) Din ( Religion ) , nor did they drive you out of your homes ( i . e . homeland ) . Surely Allah likes those who conduct themselves with equity and justice .
Allah forbids you only to befriend those who fought against you on ( the question of ) Din ( Religion ) and drove you out of your homes ( i . e . homeland ) and aided ( your enemies ) in expelling you . And whoever makes friends with them , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! When the believing women come to you as emigrants , examine them thoroughly . Allah is Well Aware of ( the reality of ) their faith . Then if you find with certitude that they are true believers , do not send them back to the disbelievers . Neither are they ( the believing women ) lawful for those disbelievers , nor are those disbelievers lawful for these ( believing women ) . And pay them ( the disbelievers ) back the money which those disbelievers spent ( on them as dower ) . And there is no sin on you if you marry them while you pay these ( women ) their dower . And , O Believers , do not hold back the disbelieving women in ( your ) wedlock and ask ( the disbelievers ) for that ( money ) which you spent ( on those women as dower ) , and they ( the disbelievers ) may also ask you for that ( money ) which they spent ( on these women as dower ) . That is the Command of Allah . And He judges between you . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And if any of your wives deserts you and goes over to the disbelievers , then ( when ) you become dominant in war and gain spoils , pay ( out of it ) those whose wives deserted them as much ( money ) as they paid ( to them as dower ) . And keep fearing Allah Whom you believe in .
O Prophet ! When the believing women appear in your presence to take the oath of allegiance that they will not set up anything as partner with Allah and will not steal , nor will they commit adultery or kill their children or bring false blame which they have invented between their hands and feet ( i . e . will not deceive their husbands declaring some others baby as born to her ) or disobey you in ( any ) matter pertaining to law , then accept their allegiance and seek forgiveness for them from Allah . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not make friends with those on whom Allah has sent His wrath . Surely they have despaired of the Hereafter as the disbelievers have despaired of those in graves .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) glorify Allah . And He is the Lord of Honour and Dominance , Most Wise .
O Believers ! Why do you say what you do not do ?
It is most hateful in the sight of Allah that you should say what you do not do .
Assuredly Allah loves those who fight in the way of Allah ( so ) organized in ranks as if they were a wall cemented with molten lead ( to eliminate injustice , tyranny and terrorism and restore peace and human dignity ) .
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my People , why do you offend me while you know that I am ( a Messenger ) sent to you by Allah . So when they continued deviating , then Allah made their hearts deviate . And Allah does not guide the defiant .
( And also recall the time ) when Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said : O Children of Israel , indeed I am ( a Messenger ) sent to you by Allah , confirming the Torah , the Book which came before me , and bearing the good news of ( the pleasant arrival ) of ( the Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) who will come after me , whose name is Ahmad ( now in the heavens ) . But when he ( the Last of the Messengers ) came to them with clear Signs , they said : This is open magic .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than he who invents a lie against Allah while he is being invited towards Islam . And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
These ( deniers of the Truth ) desire to put out the Light of Allah by ( blowing ) with their mouths whereas Allah will take His Light to perfection , even though the disbelievers may dislike it intensely .
He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and Din ( Religion ) of Truth so that He may make it dominate and prevail over all other religions , even though the idolaters may hate it much .
O Believers ! Shall I advise you a trade which will save you from a painful torment ?
( It is that ) you have ( perfect ) belief in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and toil hard for the cause of Allah with your human and material resources . That is better for you if you know .
He will forgive your sins and will admit you into Gardens with streams flowing under them and ( will make you reside ) in excellent dwellings in the Gardens of Eden ( i . e . Gardens of Eternity ) . That is indeed a great success .
And , ( besides this favour in the Hereafter , He will grant you ) another ( worldly blessing too ) which you earnestly desire : ( that is ) help from Allah and a near victory , and , ( O Esteemed Prophet , ) give this good news to the believers . ( This came about in the form of Makkan Victory and the conquests in Persia and Rome . )
O Believers ! Be helpers of Allah as Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said to ( his ) disciples : Who are my helpers towards ( the path of ) Allah ? The disciples said : We are Allahs helpers . So a party of the Children of Israel believed and a party disbelieved . So We helped the believers against their enemies and they gained the upper hand .
( Everything ) in the heavens and in the earth glorifies Allah , ( the Real ) King , the Most Pure ( of all shortcomings and imperfections ) , the Lord of Honour , the Almighty , the Most Wise .
He is the One Who sent a ( Glorious ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) among the illiterate people from among themselves who recites to them His Revelations and cleanses and purifies them ( outwardly and inwardly ) and teaches them the Book and Wisdom . Indeed they were in open error before ( his most welcome arrival ) .
( And He has sent this Messenger for purification and education among ) others of them also who have not yet joined these people ( that are present now i . e . they will come after them in the time to come ) . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
This ( arrival of the Holy Messenger and his spiritual benevolence and guidance ) are Allahs Bounty which He grants whom He likes . And Allah is Most Bountiful .
The case of those who were burdened with ( the Commandments and teachings of ) the Torah ( but ) then did not bear it ( i . e . this Messenger was mentioned in it but they disbelieved in him ) is like that of a donkey loaded with heavy books on its back . How evil is the example of those who have rejected Allahs Revelations ! And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
Say : O Jews , if you think that , leaving all other people , you alone are the friends of Allah ( i . e . Awliya ) , then long for death ( because His Awliya will not fear in the grave and the Hereafter ) if you are true ( in your thinking ) .
And these people will never long for it due to ( the rejection of the Messenger and disbelief ) which they have sent forward . And Allah knows the wrongdoers well .
Say : The death from which you are fleeing is bound to catch up with you . Then you will be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows the unseen and the seen . So He will inform you of what you used to do .
O Believers ! When on Fridays the call is made for ( Jumua ) Prayer , hasten towards the remembrance of Allah ( i . e . the Jumua sermon and Prayer ) immediately and abandon purchase and sale ( i . e . business ) . That is better for you if you have knowledge .
Then after the Prayer is offered disperse in the land and ( then ) look for Allahs bounty ( i . e . sustenance ) . And remember Allah much so that you may attain to prosperity .
And when they found some business or entertainment opportunity , they rushed towards that ( due to their neediness and financial constraint ) and left you standing ( during sermon ) . Say : Whatever is with Allah is better than sport and business . And Allah is the Best of sustainers .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) When the hypocrites come to you they say : We bear witness that you are certainly the Messenger of Allah . And Allah knows that surely you are His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . But Allah bears witness that undoubtedly the hypocrites are liars .
They have made their oaths a shield . Then they hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah . Surely that is an extremely evil ( work ) which they are doing .
The reason is that they believed ( by the word of mouth ) but remained disbelievers ( at heart ) . So their hearts have been sealed . And they do not understand ( anything ) .
( O servant ! ) When you see them , their bodies ( and height and structure ) seem attractive to you , and if they speak , you lend ear to what they say ( i . e . they will look sensible to you but the fact is that ) they are nothing but wooden bars propped up against a supporting wall . They take every loud voice ( as some suffering and misery ) befallen them . It is these ( hypocrites ) who are ( your ) enemies . So be on guard against them . May Allah ruin them ! Where are they wandering distracted !
And when it is said to them : Come so that Allahs Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) may seek forgiveness for you , these ( hypocrites ) jerk their heads aside ( insolently ) and you see them keeping away ( from your presence ) in arrogance .
It is all the same for these ( evil - fated denigrators of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) whether you seek for them forgiveness or do not seek for them forgiveness , Allah will never forgive them ( because they mock you and show you dislike and arrogance ) . Surely Allah does not provide guidance to the disobedient community .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) They are the people who say this as well ( out of malice and enmity against you ) : Do not spend on those ( destitute devotees of Allah ) who remain in the presence of the Messenger of Allah ( i . e . do not provide them financial help ) until they ( all may desert him and ) flee away ( and disperse ) . In truth , to Allah belong all the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
They say : If ( now ) we return to Madina then ( we ) the honourable ones will drive out the dishonourable ( i . e . the Muslims ) . But in fact honour belongs to Allah alone and His Messenger and the believers . However , the hypocrites do not understand ( this reality ) .
O Believers ! Let not your wealth and your children make you neglectful of the very remembrance of Allah . And whoever does so , it is they who are the losers .
And spend ( in the way of Allah ) out of ( the wealth ) which We have given you before death approaches one of you and he says : O my Lord , why did You not give me respite for a short while so that I could donate in charity and become one of the pious ?
And Allah never grants respite to anyone when his hour of death approaches . And Allah is Well Aware of the actions that you do .
Everything in the heavens and in the earth glorifies Allah . His is the entire kingdom and His is all the praise . And He is All - Powerful over everything .
He is the One Who created you . Then ( someone ) of you became a disbeliever and ( the other one ) of you became a believer and Allah sees best the actions that you do .
He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth with a rationale and purpose . And ( He is the One Who ) gave you shapes and then did up your shapes . And ( all ) have to return to Him alone .
He knows what is in the heavens and in the earth and ( also ) knows those things that you hide and that you disclose and Allah knows best ( also the secret ) matters contained in the breasts .
Has the news not reached you of those who disbelieved before you and tasted the punishment of their work ( in the world ) and there is grievous torment for them ( in the Hereafter as well ) ?
The reason is that their Messengers brought to them clear Signs but they said : Shall a human being guide us ( who is our like and from our kind ) ? So they became disbelievers and turned away ( from the Truth ) . And Allah too disregarded ( them ) and Allah is Self - Sufficient , Praiseworthy .
The disbelievers think that they will never be raised ( again ) . Say : Why not ! By my Lord ! You will surely be raised . Then you will be informed of what you did . And this is very easy for Allah ( to do ) .
So believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and that Light which We have sent down . And Allah is Well Aware of the deeds that you do .
The Day when He will gather you on the Day of Assembly ( in the vast expanse for Great Gathering ) , that will be the Day of Manifestation of Loss and Defeat . And he who believes in Allah and does pious deeds , Allah will remove his sins from his ( record of deeds ) and will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . This is a great success .
And those who disbelieve and reject Our Revelations , it is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents . And what an evil abode that is !
No suffering afflicts ( anyone ) except by the Command of Allah . And he who believes in Allah , He guides his heart and Allah knows best everything .
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . Then if you turn away ( remember that ) the responsibility of Our Messenger is only to deliver ( the injunctions ) clearly .
Allah ( alone ) is ( God ) . There is no God but He . And the believers should put their trust in Allah alone .
O Believers ! Surely among your wives and your children there are some who are your enemies . So , beware of them ! And if you overlook it and forbear and forgive , Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Your riches and your children are merely a trial . And there is a mighty reward in the Presence of Allah .
So fear Allah as much as you are able to . And listen to ( His Commands ) and obey and spend ( in His way ) . That will be better for you . And whoever is saved from the miserliness of his ( ill - commanding ) self , so it is they who will attain to prosperity .
If you lend a good loan to Allah ( with sincerity and righteous intention ) , He will increase it manifold for you and will forgive you . And Allah is Most Appreciative , Most Forbearing .
The Knower of the unseen and the seen , the Lord of Honour and Almighty and Most Wise .
O Prophet ! ( Say to the Muslims : ) When you seek to divorce your women , divorce them during their period of purity and count their prescribed period . And keep fearing Allah , Who is your Lord . And do not drive them out of their homes nor should they leave unless they commit open indecency . And these are Allahs ( fixed ) limits . And whoever transgresses Allahs limits has surely wronged his own soul . ( O man , ) you do not know that perhaps Allah may develop a new situation ( to turn you back to her after divorce ) .
Then when they reach closer to ( the end of ) their appointed term , retain them with kindness or separate from them with kindness . And take two just persons from among you as witnesses and establish testimony for the sake of Allah . This is an advice for him alone who believes in Allah and the Last Day . And whoever fears Allah He makes a way out for him ( from pain and grief of this world and the Hereafter ) .
And He gives him sustenance from a source which he can never think of . And whoever puts his trust in Allah then He ( Allah ) is Sufficient for him . Surely Allah accomplishes His work entirely . He has certainly appointed a measure for everything .
And those of your women who have no hope of menstruation , if you doubt ( as to what will be their prescribed period ) , then their prescribed period is three months . And for those women who have not yet menstruated ( their prescribed period is also the same ) . As for the pregnant women , their term is till the birth of the child . And whoever fears Allah , He makes his matter easy for him .
This is the Command of Allah which He has sent down to you . And whoever fears Allah He removes his minor sins from his ( record of deeds ) and enhances for him reward .
Keep the ( divorced ) women where you live according to your means . And do not harm them so as to make ( the place of living ) intolerable for them . And if they are pregnant , keep spending on them till they give birth to the child . Then if they suckle ( the child ) for your sake , pay them their recompense . And consult each other ( as usual ) for good . But if you experience difficulty mutually ( then some ) other woman may suckle the child .
The affluent should spend ( according to ) his means . And whoever is provided sustenance scarcely , let him spend ( on her maintenance ) out of the provision which Allah has given him . Allah does not burden anyone beyond what He has given him . Allah will soon bring about ease after hardship .
And how many towns there were ( the inhabitants of ) which disobeyed and revolted against the command of their Lord and His Messengers ! So We called them to account in the shape of fierce accountability and seized them with such a severe torment as was never seen or even heard of .
So they tasted the evil consequence of their doings and their affair ended up in total loss .
Allah has prepared for them severe torment ( in the Hereafter too ) . So keep fearing Allah , O men of reason , you who have believed . No doubt it is you towards whom Allah has sent down the Reminder ( the Quran ) .
And ( has sent also ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) who recites to you clear Verses so that he may take those who have believed and do pious deeds from darkness to light . And he who believes in Allah and does pious deeds , He will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . Indeed Allah has ( prepared ) for him excellent sustenance .
Allah ( alone ) has created seven heavens and ( brought about seven strata layer upon layer also while creating ) the earth like them . And the Command ( phenomenon of coordination in the system of nature ) continues to operate among them so that you may know that Allah has Absolute Power over everything , and that Allah has encompassed everything with His Knowledge ( i . e . when scientific explorations will culminate , you will then perceive the Glory of Allahs Power and His All - Encompassing Knowledge as to how He has described the realities of His Creation centuries before ) .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Why do you forbid yourself ( taking honey ) which Allah has made for you lawful ? ( How well ) you seek to please your wives ! And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Believers ! ) Indeed Allah has prescribed for you how to dissolve your oaths ( by atonement ) . And Allah is your Helper and Protector . And He is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And when the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] secretly disclosed a matter to one of his wives but when she mentioned it and Allah made it known to the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then the Prophet reminded her of some part of it and overlooked ( to inform ) the rest of it . Then when the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) informed her of it ( that she had disclosed that secret ) , she said : Who has told you of that ? The Prophet said : All - Knowing , All - Aware ( Lord ) has told me .
If you both turn to Allah in repentance ( that is better for you ) because the hearts of both of you have inclined ( towards the same ) but if you help one another in this matter ( that may annoy the Holy Prophet ) . So surely Allah is the One Who is his Friend and Helper and Jibril [ Gabriel ] and the most pious believers and after them ( all ) angels too are ( his ) helpers .
If he divorces you then it may well be that your Lord will give him in your place better wives than yourselves ( who ) will be obedient , true believers , submissive , penitent , worshippers , given to fasting , ( some ) formerly married and ( some ) virgins .
O Believers ! Safeguard yourselves and your families against a Fire whose fuel is men and stones . Strong and stern angels have been appointed over it who do not disobey Allah whatever command He gives them to execute . And they accomplish only that assignment which they are commanded to do .
O disbelievers ! Do not make any excuse today . You will only be paid the reward of what you have been doing .
O Believers ! Turn towards Allahs Presence in perfect and most sincere repentance . Your Lord will certainly remove your sins from you and admit you to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . On the Day when Allah will not slight ( His ) Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those believers who are in his companionship ( visibly or invisibly ) , their light will be moving fast ( brightening ) ahead of them and on their right hand . They will be submitting : O our Lord , perfect our light for us and forgive us . Surely You have Absolute Power over everything .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Struggle hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and treat them strictly . And their abode is Hell . And what an evil abode that is !
Allah has described for disbelievers the example of Nuhs ( Noahs ) wife ( Wahila ) and Luts ( Lots ) wife ( Waila ) . They were married to two most pious of Our servants . But both of them betrayed them . So they could not help them before ( the torment of ) Allah and it was said to them : Both of you ( women ) enter Hell along with all who enter it .
And Allah has given for the believers the example of Pharaohs wife ( Asiya daughter of Mazahim ) when she submitted : O my Lord , build a house for me in Paradise in Your Presence and deliver me from Pharaoh and his ( evil ) conduct and also rescue me from the wrongdoing people .
And ( the second example is given of ) Maryam ( Mary ) , the daughter of Imran , who guarded well her chastity and purity . And We breathed Our Spirit into the sternal opening of ( her ) shirt . And she confirmed the Commandments of her Lord and the ( revealed ) Books and she was of the obedient .
Blessed is He in Whose ( Mighty ) Hand is the Kingdom ( of all the worlds ) . And He enjoys Perfect Command over everything .
He Who has created death and life ( so that ) He may test you as to which of you is best in conduct . And He is Almighty , Most Forgiving .
He Who has created seven ( or numerous ) heavenly spheres corresponding to one another ( layer upon layer ) . You will not find any irregularity and disproportion in the system of the creation of the Most Kind ( Lord ) . So have a ( meditative and thoughtful ) look around : do you find in this ( Creation ) any incongruity or disharmony ( i . e . degeneration or falling apart ) ?
Look around time and again with ( an inquisitive ) vision ( from different angles and with scientific methods . Every time ) your sight will return to you fatigued and frustrated ( in finding any shortcoming or imperfection ) .
And surely We have adorned the lowest heaven of the universe with lights ( in the form of stars , planets , other asteroids and meteoroids ) . And We have also made ( some of them ) the means of pelting away ( i . e . eliminating the negative effects of ) satans ( i . e . rebellious forces ) . And We have prepared for these ( satans ) a torment of Blazing Fire .
And for those who have denied their Lord is the torment of Hell . And what an evil abode it is !
When they will be flung into it they will hear its horrifying roar . And that ( Fire ) will be boiling ( with rage ) .
As if it is about to burst into pieces with intense wrath . When a group will be cast into it , its guards will ask them : Did no Warner come to you ?
They will say : Yes indeed ! A Warner did come to us but we rejected him and said : Allah has not sent down anything . You are just in great error .
And they will say : Had we listened to or understood ( the Truth ) , we would not have been ( put ) among the inmates of Hell ( today ) .
Then they will confess their sin . So remoteness for the inmates of Hell ( from Allahs Mercy ) is ( destined ) .
Surely those who fear their Lord unseen , for them is forgiveness and great reward .
And whether you speak in secret or aloud , certainly He knows best ( even ) the things ( hidden ) in the hearts .
Does He , Who has created , not know ? In truth He is the One Who can see the essence and is Well Aware ( of everything ) .
He is the One Who has made the earth soft and subservient to you . So walk about through its tracks and eat of the sustenance ( given ) by Him and towards Him alone is the return , rising ( after death ) .
Have you gone fearless of ( the Lord of ) the heaven that He may sink you into the earth when it suddenly shakes ?
Have you gone fearless of ( the Lord of ) the heaven that He may send against you a stone - pelting wind ? Then soon will you come to know how My Warning is !
And surely those before them ( also ) denied . But how ( awful did prove ) My denial !
Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and ( sometimes ) folding them ? Nothing can hold them ( from falling down in the air ) except ( the law made by ) the Most Kind ( Lord ) . Surely He sees everything best .
Well , is there anyone that can muster an army to help you against the Most Kind Lord ? The disbelievers are merely ( snared ) in deception .
Well , is there anyone that can provide you sustenance if ( Allah ) holds back His sustenance ( from you ) ? In fact they are adamantly fixed in rebellion and hatred ( for Truth )
Is he who walks in prone position more rightly guided or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
Say : ( Allah ) is He Who created you and provided you with ears and eyes and hearts . Yet you give thanks but little .
Say : He is the One Who has spread you in the earth and you will be gathered towards Him ( on the Day of Assembly ) .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Day of Resurrection ) be fulfilled if you are truthful ?
Say : The knowledge ( of that Hour ) is with Allah alone and I am just a clear Warner . ( If the time is disclosed there will be no fear any more ) .
Then when they will see that ( Day ) near , the faces of the disbelievers will be deformed and turned black and it will be said ( to them ) : This is ( the promise ) which you asked for ( to come to pass in haste ) .
Say : Well , give your view : if Allah causes me death ( as you desire ) and ( also ) to my companions , or shows Mercy to us ( i . e . defers our death ) , then ( in both these cases ) who will shelter the disbelievers from the painful torment ?
Say : He alone is the Most Kind ( Lord ) in Whom we believe and in Whom we trust . So you will soon know who is in open error .
Say : If your water sinks far deep into the earth ( i . e . dries up ) then who will bring you flowing water ( on earth ) ?
Nun . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) By the pen and by that ( subject ) which ( the angels ) write down !
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) By the Grace of your Lord you are not ( at all ) insane .
And assuredly for you there is a reward that will never end .
And assuredly you are placed high on the Most Glorious and Exalted ( seat of ) Character ( i . e . adorned with the Quranic morality and endowed with the character traits of Allah ) .
Soon you will see and they ( too ) will see .
As to which of you is mad .
Surely your Lord knows him best who has strayed from the straight path and ( also ) knows best those who are rightly guided .
So do not agree with what the beliers say .
They wish that you should become ( needlessly ) flexible ( in the matter of Din [ Religion ] ) . Then they too would show flexibility .
And do not agree with any vile , most mean swearer of oaths .
( The one who is ) a slanderer , fault - finder , mischief - monger ( and ) backbiting the people to rouse strife .
( The one who ) hinders pious works very much and is a miser , rebellious transgressor ( and ) toughened sinner .
( The one who is ) rude , unmannerly , crooked and moreover of doubtful birth .
So ( do not pay any heed to him ) because he is wealthy and has children .
When Our Verses are recited to him he says : These are fictitious stories of the bygone people .
Now We will brand him on the snout .
Surely We will try them ( the inhabitants of Makka in the same way ) as We tried ( in Yemen ) the owners of the garden when they swore that they would surely pluck its fruit the next morning .
And they did not make any exception ( saying if Allah wills or for the share of the orphans ) .
So a whirl ( of disaster ) from your Lord went round ( that garden during the night ) while they were asleep .
So , that ( waving fruit - laden garden ) became a harvested field in the morning .
Then as the day dawned they started calling out one another .
Leave early for your tilth if you want to pick the fruit .
So they set off whispering , to one another .
Do not let any pauper come near you in the garden today .
And early in the morning they left , ( feeling ) quite competent to execute their plan ( of getting the yield and depriving the poor of their share ) .
Then when they saw that ( ruined garden ) , they said : We must have lost our way ; ( this is not our garden ) .
( But when they saw it cautiously , they cried : Oh no ! ) We have been deprived indeed .
One of them wise and inclined to the balanced judgment said : Did I not say to you : why do you not glorify and remember Allah ?
( Then ) they said : Our Lord is Holy . Surely it is we who were the wrongdoers .
So , blaming and maligning , they turned to one another .
They said : Woe to us ! No doubt it is we who were disobedient and rebellious .
We hope that our Lord may give us something better than this in exchange . Verily we turn to our Lord .
Such is the punishment . And truly the torment of the Hereafter is far greater ( than this ) . Would that they only knew !
Surely for the Godfearing there are Gardens of Bliss with their Lord .
Shall We ( deprive ) the obedient like the disobedient ?
What is the matter with you ? How do you make a judgment ?
Do you have any Book with you in which you read ( this ) .
That it contains all that you like ?
Or have you any ( such ) firm covenants from Us which will subsist till the Day of Resurrection ( by means of which We are bound ) that you will be provided with whatever you shall decide ( for yourselves ) ?
Ask them which of them will vouch for such ( a baseless assertion ) !
Or do they have any partners ( as well ) ? Then they should bring their partners if they are truthful .
The Day when the shin ( i . e . the terrifying fierceness of the Hour of Rising ) will be laid bare , and ( the disobedient ) people will be called to prostrate themselves but they will not be able to do so ( i . e . to prostrate themselves ) .
Their eyes will be cast down ( with terror and shame ) and disgrace will be spreading over them whereas they were called to prostrate themselves ( in the world also ) when they were healthy ( but they , even then , refused to fall prostrate ) .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) leave Me ( to exact revenge ) from the one who rejects this Revelation . Now We shall take them ( towards disaster ) so gradually that they will not perceive it .
And I am giving them respite . Surely My strategy is unbeatable .
Do you ask them for any reward ( for preaching the faith in Messengership ) that they are weighed down with ( the burden of ) paying the recompense ?
Do they have the knowledge of the unseen that they write down ( their judgments on the basis of that ) ?
So be steadfast in waiting for the Command of your Lord and do not ( take it to your heart ) like ( Yunus [ Jonah ] , the Messenger with ) Fish episode , when he cried out ( to Allah ) in a state pent - up with rage and grief ( against his community ) .
Had the Mercy and Blessing of his Lord not helped him , he would certainly have been thrown in the barren field , blamed . ( But Allah saved him from that . )
Then his Lord exalted him and ( placed him ) among the perfectly pious , ( blessing him with His exceptional nearness ) .
And indeed when the disbelievers listen to the Quran it seems as if they wish to damage you with their ( jealously evil ) looks and say : He is insane .
And it ( the Quran ) is direction and guidance for all the worlds .
The surely Inevitable Hour !
What is the surely Inevitable Hour ?
And what has made you alert what ( calamity ) surely is the Inevitable Hour ?
Thamud and Ad rejected the ( calamity of a ) Shattering Gravitational Collision ( of all the existent cosmic bodies ) .
So , as for the people of Thamud , they were destroyed by the extremely violent Deafening Blast .
And as for the people of Ad , they ( too ) were destroyed by a violently cold roaring gale .
Allah made that ( gale ) seize them for consecutive seven nights and eight days . So , you could see them lying dead ( during that time as if ) they were hollow roots of the uprooted palm trees .
So do you see any of them surviving ?
And Pharaoh and those before him and ( the dwellers of ) the overthrown towns ( of the community of Lut [ Lot ] ) committed grave sins .
So they ( also ) disobeyed the Messenger of their Lord . And Allah seized them with a mighty seizure .
Indeed when water ( of the Deluge ) overflowed the limit , We carried you in the floating Ark .
So that We make this ( episode a reminding ) lesson of warning for you and that the retentive ears may retain it .
Then when the Trumpet will be blown once .
And the earth and mountains will be removed ( from their places ) , they will then be crushed to sand particles in a single crash .
Then that will be the Hour when the surely Inevitable ( calamity ) will occur .
And ( all ) the heavenly bodies will split apart and this universe will come to comprise ( black ) holes ( by means of a force which coordinates and keeps the system going ) . *
And the angels will be standing on its edges and above them that Day eight ( angels or parties of angels ) will be carrying the Throne of your Lord .
That Day you will be made to appear ( for reckoning ) . Nothing of your secrets will remain hidden .
So the one who will be given his record in the right hand will say ( pleased ) : Come and read my record .
I firmly believed that I would find my account ( easy ) .
So he will live a pleasant life .
In an elevated lofty Paradise .
The clusters of its fruits hanging low ( due to abundance ) .
( It will be said to them : ) Eat and drink rejoicing , in recompense of ( your deeds ) that you had sent forward during the days of your past ( life ) .
And as for him who will be given his Record in his left hand will say : Would that I had not been given my Record !
And would that I had not known about my account !
Alas ! Would that ( death ) had settled my affair once for all !
Today my wealth has not been able to keep ( the torment ) away from me even a little .
My power and domain have ( also ) gone from me .
( It will be commanded : ) Seize him and put him in neck - fetter .
Then cast him into Hell .
Then bind him tightly in a seventy yard long chain .
Verily he did not believe in Allah , the Lord of Majesty .
Nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
So today he does not have any warm friend .
Nor has he anything to eat except filthy pus .
That no one will eat except the sinners .
So I swear by the things that you see .
And by those things that you do not see .
Assuredly this ( Quran ) is the ( God - sent ) Commandment of the Exalted and Glorious Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] which he expounds as a Messenger and as a Vicegerent ) .
And it is not the poetry of a poet ( composed with literary expertise ) . You have but little faith .
Nor it is the word of a fortune - teller ( designed by skilful guesswork ) . You take but little advice .
( This ) is sent down by the Lord of all the worlds .
And had he ascribed to Us even a ( single ) fabricated thing .
We would have seized him with full force and might .
Then certainly We would have cut his life artery .
Then no one of you could have held ( Us ) back from it .
So no doubt this ( Quran ) is direction and guidance for the Godfearing .
And surely We know that some of you are the beliers ( of this open Truth ) .
And surely this is ( a cause of ) bitter regret for the disbelievers .
And undeniably it is the Truth of Absolute Certitude .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) glorify your Lord , Most Magnificent , with persistence .
A questioner asked for the torment which is sure to come about .
Upon the disbelievers , which no one can repel .
( That will befall ) from Allah , Who is the Lord of the Ascending Steps to Heaven ( and of the higher ranks and grades of spiritual hierarchy ) .
The angels and ar - Ruh al - Amin ( the Spirit ) rise towards His ( Throne ) in a day which measures fifty thousand years ( according to the worldly scale ) .
So , ( O Beloved , ) observe patience ( on the assertions of the disbelievers ) without regrets .
Surely they imagine that ( Day ) to be far off .
But We see it very near .
On that Day the sky will become like molten copper .
And the mountains like ( flakes of ) coloured wool .
And no friend will enquire after his friend .
( Though ) they will be shown ( to one another ) . The sinner would desire to ransom himself from the torment of that Day by his children .
And ( by giving ) his wife and his brother .
And ( all ) his family who used to provide him shelter .
And all the people on earth ( as recompense for himself ) , so that this ( atonement ) may save him from ( Allahs torment ) .
But no ! By no means ! Surely that is a Flaming Fire .
Stripping off the skin of all the limbs and the scalp .
It is calling him who turned his back ( on the Truth ) and turned away .
And ( he who ) accumulated wealth and then held it ( from distribution ) .
Surely man has been created impatient and greedy .
He gets upset and worried when some hardship ( or financial loss ) afflicts him .
But becomes miserly when he receives good fortune ( or affluence ) .
Except for those who offer Prayer .
And are constant in their Prayer .
And those ( who are committed to sacrifice and ) in whose wealth there is a fixed share .
Of one who begs and of one who is needy but does not beg .
And those who affirm the Day of Requital .
And those who fear the torment of their Lord .
Surely the torment of their Lord is not a thing which should not be feared .
And those who safeguard their private parts .
Except from their wives or the female slaves they possess . So ( in this ) there is no blame on them .
But he who looks for more than that , then it is they who transgress the limits .
And those who safeguard their trusts and promises .
And those who stand firm on their testimonies .
And those who safeguard their Prayers .
It is they who will enjoy great honour and respect in the Gardens .
So what is the matter with the disbelievers that they are coming towards you running .
From the right as well as the left , in groups ?
Does everyone of them hope that he may be admitted to the Garden of Bliss ( without faith and deeds ) ?
Certainly not ! Surely We have created them from a substance which they ( also ) know .
So I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that surely We have Absolute Power .
To replace them with people better than them and We are not at all incapable ( of doing it ) .
So leave them occupied with their absurd talk and pastime until they meet that Day of theirs which they have been promised .
The Day when they will come forth from their graves in haste as if they are running towards the temples of their idols .
( Their plight ) will be that their eyes will be cast down ( with shame and fear ) and disgrace enveloping them . It is this Day which they were promised .
Surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people : Warn your people before a painful torment comes upon them .
He said : O my people ! Indeed I am a clear Warner to you .
That you must worship Allah and fear Him and obey me .
He will forgive your sins and will give you respite till an appointed term . Surely when ( the appointed ) time of Allah comes then respite is not given if only you knew .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! Indeed I kept calling my people night and day .
But my calling did no good except making them flee away .
And every time I called them ( towards faith ) so that You forgive them , they only thrust their fingers into their ears and wrapped their clothes over themselves and stuck obstinately ( to disbelief ) and behaved most arrogantly .
Then I called them aloud .
Then I advised them publicly and privately and secretly ( as well ) .
Then I said : Seek forgiveness from your Lord . Surely He is Most Forgiving .
He will send down on you torrents of rain .
And will help you with wealth and sons and will grow for you gardens and will make streams flow for you .
What is the matter with you that you do not have faith in or the gnosis of Allahs Majesty .
Whereas He has created you through diverse conditions ?
Have you not seen how Allah has created seven ( or many ) heavenly spheres corresponding to one another ( layer upon layer ) ?
And He brightened in them the moon and made the sun a radiant lamp ( i . e . the source of light and heat ) .
And Allah has caused you to grow like vegetation from the earth .
Then He will return you into the same ( earth ) and will then bring you forth ( from the same again ) .
And Allah has made the earth a vast expanse for you .
So that you may move around through its broad ways .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! They have disobeyed me and kept following that ( class of the rebellious rich ) whose wealth and children have not increased for them anything but loss .
And they kept perpetrating huge frauds ( to keep the common man in error ) .
And they kept saying : Do not turn away from your gods and never abandon ( the idols named as ) Wadd , Suwa , Yaghuth , Yauq and Nasr ( as well ) .
And truly they have misled many people . So , ( O my Lord , ) do not increase these wrongdoers ( in anything ) except misguidance .
( In the end ) they were drowned due to their sins and then flung into the Fire . So they could not find any helper for themselves against Allah .
And Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! Do not leave even a single disbeliever living on earth .
Surely if You leave them ( alive ) they will keep leading your servants astray and will beget none but the most wicked and extremely disbelieving children .
O my Lord ! Forgive me and my parents and everyone who enters my home as a believer and ( all ) the believing men and the believing women and do not increase anything for the wrongdoers except destruction .
Say : It has been revealed to me that a party of the jinn listened to ( my recitation ) carefully and then ( went back to their people and ) said : Surely we have heard a wonderful Quran .
It shows the path of guidance . So we have believed in it and will never set up any partner with our Lord .
And that exalted High is the Glory of our Lord . He has taken to Himself neither any wife nor children .
And that only a fool from among us used to utter things about Allah far from the Truth , crossing bounds .
And that we thought that man and jinn would never tell a lie against Allah .
And that some of the men used to take shelter with some of the jinn . So they increased defiance among the jinn .
And , ( O party of jinn , ) those men also thought just as you thought that Allah would never raise up anyone ( after death ) .
And that we touched the heavens and found them filled with high - alert guards and stars shining and burning ( like brands ) .
And that we used to sit on certain seats ( in the heaven previously , to listen to the news ) , but if someone now seeks to listen then he will find a flame of fire ( waiting ) for him in ambush .
And that we do not know whether some evil has been intended ( by our restriction ) in respect of those people who are in the earth or their Lord intends some good for them .
And that among us are some who are pious and there are also some ( evil ) exceptions among us . We were ( following ) different ways .
And we have ascertained that we can by no means come in the way of Allah ( while living ) in the earth , nor can we thwart Him by escaping ( from the earth ) .
And that when we listened to ( the Book of ) Guidance , we believed in it . Then he who believes in his Lord fears neither loss nor injustice .
And that ( some ) of us are obedient and ( some ) of us are wrongdoers as well . So he who becomes obedient , it is they who seek righteousness .
And as for the wrongdoers , they will be the fuel of Hell .
And this ( Revelation has also come to me ) that if they had remained firm on the right path ( the path of Truth , the path of the remembrance of Allah ) , then We would have provided them with abundant water .
So that We put them to trial by this blessing . And whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord , He will cause him to enter a severe torment .
And that mosques are ( specified ) for Allah alone . So never worship anyone else besides Allah .
And that when the servant of Allah ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) stood up to worship Him they thronged around him ( to listen to his recitation ) .
Say : I worship only my Lord and do not associate any partner with Him .
Say : I do not possess any power to do you harm ( make you disbelieve ) or to do you good ( i . e . make you believe . So Allah is the real Lord . I am a mediator and means ) .
Say : Neither can anyone shelter me from a torment ( against the command ) of Allah , nor can I ever find refuge apart from Him alone .
But ( my responsibility is ) to communicate from Allah His Commands and Messages . And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , surely there is for him the Fire of Hell in which they will live forever .
Until when they will see that torment which is being promised to them , ( then ) they will come to know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
Say : I do not know whether that ( Day of Rising ) which is being promised to you is near or my Lord has appointed a longer term for that .
( He is ) the Knower of the unseen . So He does not inform any ( common man ) of His unseen .
Except for His Messengers with whom He is well - pleased ( and reveals to them alone the Unseen because that is an exclusive trait of Prophethood and a Messengers miracle as well ) . So indeed He appoints protectors at both front and rear of him ( the Messenger , for the security of the knowledge of the Unseen ) .
So that Allah may bring ( this thing ) to light that surely they ( the Messengers ) have communicated the Messages of their Lord and Allah has ( already ) encompassed what they have ( of Allahs Injunctions and the knowledge of the Unseen ) and He has kept count of everything .
O mantled ( Beloved ! )
Rise and stand ( in Prayer ) at night but ( for ) a short while .
Half the night or decrease it a little .
Or increase it a little more to it . And recite the Quran with most pleasant pauses .
Soon We shall send down to you a burdensome command .
No doubt rising at night strictly subdues ( the ill - commanding self ) and makes the tongue deliver straight and clear speech ( with the concentration of head and heart ) .
Of course there are many commitments for you during the day .
And continue remembering the Name of your Lord , devoted completely to Him alone ( in your heart and soul ) , broken away from everyone else .
He is the Lord of the east and the west . There is no God but He . So take Him alone as ( your ) Guardian .
And observe patience with what the ( disbelievers ) utter and turn aside from them in a fine manner .
And leave Me ( to deal ) with the denying rich money - mongers ( to take revenge ) . And give them a little respite ( so that their evil deeds may cross the limit ) .
Surely We have heavy shackles and the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
And food that chokes the throat and most painful torment .
The Day when the earth and the mountains shall shake violently and mountains will turn into heaps of flying away sand .
Surely We have sent towards you a Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , who bears witness to you ( seeing thoroughly your states of being ) , as We sent a Messenger towards Pharaoh .
So Pharaoh disobeyed that Messenger and We seized him with a devastating seizure .
If you continue disbelieving , then how will you save yourselves from ( the torment of ) that Day which will turn the children old .
( The day ) by whose severity the heaven will be split apart ? His promise is bound to be fulfilled .
Verily this ( Quran ) is an admonition . So let him who desires adopt the way to reach his Lord .
Surely your Lord knows that you stand ( for Prayer sometimes ) about two - thirds of the night and ( sometimes ) half the night and ( sometimes ) a third of the night , and ( also ) a party of those who are with you ( join in standing up for Prayer ) .
And Allah is the One Who keeps the true measure ( of increasing or decreasing ) the night and the day .
He knows that you just do not have the power to encompass it so He granted you forgiveness ( by reducing the toil ) .
So recite the Quran as much as is easy for you . He knows that ( some of ) you will be ill and ( some ) others will be travelling in the land to look for Allahs bounty and ( still some ) others will be fighting in the way of Allah .
So recite as much as is easy for you . And establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and lend Allah a goodly loan .
And whatever good you will send forward for yourselves , you will find it in the Presence of Allah much better and in reward still greater .
And keep seeking forgiveness from Allah . Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O enwrapped ( Beloved ! )
Rise and give warning ( to the people ) .
And glorify the Greatnesss ( and Majesty ) of your Lord .
And ( always ) keep your ( visible and spiritual ) attire purified and cleansed ( as before ) .
And keep away from the idols ( and sins as usual ) .
And do not do favour ( to anyone with the purpose of ) seeking more from him .
And observe patience for the sake of your Lord .
Then when the Trumpet will be blown ( a second time ) .
So that Day ( i . e . the Day of Resurrection ) will be an extremely hard day .
Not at all easy for the disbelievers .
Leave Me ( to take the revenge ) on him whom I have created lonely .
And I provided him wealth in abundance .
And ( gave ) him sons remaining present ( before him ) .
And granted him affluence ( in sources of luxury ) .
Yet he desires that I should give him more .
No way ! He has certainly been inimical to Our Revelations .
Soon I will afflict him with ( the punishment of ) a severe toil .
Surely he reflected and devised a scheme ( in his heart ) .
Let ( Allahs ) woe ( curse ) be to him ! How he schemed ?
Let again ( Allahs ) woe ( curse ) be to him ! How he schemed ?
Then he pondered ( over his scheme again ) .
Then he frowned and twisted his face .
Then he turned back ( from the Truth ) and showed arrogance .
Then he said : This ( Quran ) is nothing but magic which is being transmitted from the past ( magicians ) .
This ( Quran ) is nothing ( else ) but the words of a human being .
I will soon cast him into Hell .
And who has told you what Saqar ( the Fire of Hell ) is ?
That ( is the fire which ) does not spare , nor does leave out .
( That ) scorches the skin and blackens it .
There are nineteen ( angels appointed as guards ) over it .
And We have appointed only angels as guards of Hell .
And We have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers so that the People of the Book may believe with certitude ( that the Quran and the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon be upon him ] is a Truth because the same number was given in their Scriptures as well ) ,
and that the faith of the believers may further be strengthened ( with this confirmation ) ,
and that the people of the Book and the believers may not doubt ( its trueness ) ,
and that those having disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts and the disbelievers may say : What does Allah intend by this example ( of number ) ?
In this way Allah holds astray whom He wills and guides aright whom He wills ( with the same stroke ) .
And no one knows the armies of your Lord except Him . And this ( description of Hell is nothing else ) but an admonition to mankind .
Yes ! By the moon ( whose increase , decrease and disappearance is evidence ) .
And by the night when it backs away to depart .
And by the morning when it brightens .
Surely this ( Hell ) is one of the greatest calamities .
It is a warning to mankind .
For any of you who seeks to advance forward ( in piety ) or who lags behind ( trapped in evil ) .
Everyone is held in pledge for ( the deeds ) that he has earned .
Except for those on the Right Side .
( They ) will be in Gardens and will be asking one another .
About the evildoers .
( And they will say : ) What has brought you into Hell ?
They will say : We were not of those who used to offer Prayers .
Nor did we feed the poor .
And we indulged in vain activities with those who had cast themselves into vain activities .
And we rejected the Day of Reward and Punishment .
Until that ( death ) came upon us which was certain to come .
So ( now ) intercession of the intercessors will not be of any benefit to them .
Then what is the matter with these ( disbelievers that even then ) they turn away from the Reminder .
As if they were startled ( wild ) donkeys .
Fleeing away from a lion ?
In fact everyone of them desires that he should be given ( directly ) open scrolls of ( heavenly ) Scriptures .
That is not possible at all . Rather ( the fact is that ) they fear not the Last Day .
There is no doubt that this ( Quran ) is a Reminder .
So whoever wills may remember it .
And they will not remember ( it ) unless Allah so wills . He is the One to Whom fearing ( and righteousness ) is due , and He alone is the Lord of Forgiveness .
I swear by the Day of Resurrection .
And I swear by the blaming self , reproaching ( itself for evil deeds ) .
Does man think We will not at all collect his bones ( which will decompose into dust particles after his death ) ?
Yes , of course ! We have also the power to restore and set right even his finger joints ( phalanges ) and finger tips .
Yet man still wants to continue committing sins also ( in the life to come ) .
He asks ( scornfully ) : When is the Day of Resurrection ?
But when the eyes will be dazzled .
And the moon will be eclipsed .
And the sun and the moon will be fused ( darkened ) together .
On that Day will man cry out : Where to flee away ?
No indeed ! There is no place of refuge .
The place of refuge and repose that Day will be with your Lord alone .
That Day man will be informed of those ( deeds ) which he sent forward and those ( repercussions ) which he left behind ( after his death ) .
In truth , man will ( himself ) be aware of ( the affairs of ) his self .
Even though he will offer all his excuses .
( O Beloved ! ) Do not move your tongue in a hurry ( to learn the Quran by heart when it is revealed to you ) .
Assuredly upon Us rests its collection and preservation ( in your breast ) and its recitation ( by your tongue ) .
So when We complete its recitation ( by the tongue of Jibril [ Gabriel ] ) then follow that recitation .
Then surely upon Us is the clear exposition ( of its implications ) .
The truth is , ( O disbelievers , ) that you love ( the world ) which you can readily gain .
And you have left aside the Hereafter .
Many faces will be fresh and in full bloom that Day .
Viewing ( the enchanting radiance and beauty of ) their Lord ( unveiled ) .
And many faces will be deformed ( depressed and dark ) that Day .
Thinking that they will be subjected to such a harsh treatment which will break their backbones .
No indeed ! When the soul reaches the throat .
And it is said : Who can ( now ) treat him with magic ( to cure him ) ?
And ( the departing soul ) comes to realize that ( now ) is the hour of parting ( with all ) .
And one leg clings to the other .
Towards your Lord is the departure that day .
So ( how ill - fated is he that ) he neither affirmed ( what the Messenger said ) nor offered Prayer .
Rather he kept belying and turning away .
Then went off towards his family in arrogance .
Woe to you ( when dying ) , then woe to you ( in the grave ) .
Then again woe to you ( on the Last Day ) , then woe to you ( in Hell ) .
Does man think that he will be left for nothing ( without any reckoning ) ?
Was he not ( in his beginning ) a sperm drop ejaculated ( into the womans womb ) ?
Then it developed into a hanging mass ( clinging to the womb like a nest ) . Then He created ( in it the preliminary form of all the limbs of the body ) . Then He set ( them ) right .
Then He made from the same sperm drop two genders : male and female .
Then has He not the power to give life to the dead again ?
Surely there has passed over man a period of time when he was not a thing worth mentioning .
Surely We created man from a fertilized ovum that We keep turning and examining ( from one stage to the next till birth ) . So We have made him ( in the order of ) hearing ( then ) seeing .
Indeed We also showed him the way ( to understanding and insight for distinguishing between the Truth and falsehood ) whether he ( now ) becomes thankful or continues to be ungrateful .
Verily We have prepared for the disbelievers chains ( for the feet ) , neck - fetter and the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
Surely the sincerely devoted and obedient will drink from the cups ( of the holy drink ) mixed with kafur ( to enhance its aroma , colour and taste ) .
( Kafur ) is a spring ( in Paradise ) from which will drink ( the privileged ) servants of Allah ( i . e . Awliya Allah ) and will ( also ) make it flow to wherever they will desire in the form of small brooks ( to make others drink of it ) .
( These privileged servants of Allah are those ) who fulfil their vows and keep fearing that Day whose severity spreads afar .
And they give ( their own ) food , in deep love of Allah , to the needy , the orphan and prisoner ( out of sacrifice , despite their own desire and need for it ) .
( And say : ) We are feeding you only to please Allah . We do not seek any recompense from you nor ( wish for ) any thanks .
We fear from our Lord the Day which will make ( the faces ) look very dark ( and ) ugly .
So Allah will save them from the terror of that Day ( for their fear of Allah ) and will grant them freshness , bloom and blush ( on their faces ) and ecstasy and delight ( in their hearts ) .
And will bless them with Gardens ( to live in ) and silky clothes ( to wear ) , a reward for their patience .
Reclining in it against cushions on raised couches , they will find there neither intense cold nor heat .
And the shades ( of trees in Paradise ) will close upon them and the bunches of their ( fruits ) will be hanging low .
And ( the servants ) will go round them with vessels of silver and ( pure and clean ) goblets of shining glass .
And glasses made of silver which they will have filled with exact measures ( according to everyones desire ) .
And they will be made to drink there cups of ( the holy drink ) mixed with Zanjabil .
( Zanjabil ) is a spring in this ( Paradise ) named Salsabil .
And going round them will be ( innocent ) adolescents who will remain ever - young . When you will see them you will take them as scattered pearls .
And when you will look ( at Paradise ) you will find blessings ( in abundance ) and a mighty kingdom ( all around ) .
They will be clad in green fine silk and rich brocade attire , and they will be made to wear silver bracelets , and their Lord will make them drink a holy beverarge .
Surely that will be your reward and your hard work is acknowledged .
Indeed We have revealed the Quran to you piecemeal .
So ( continue to ) be patient for the sake of your Lords Command and do not give your ear to any liar , sinner or disbeliever or thankless person from among them .
And remember the Name of your Lord morning and evening .
And prostrate yourself before His Presence for some hours of the night and glorify Him during ( the rest of ) the long hours of the night .
Surely these ( world - mongers ) love the gains that are achievable right away . And they have put behind their backs ( the remembrance of ) the very hard Day .
( They do not realize that ) We alone have created them and have made their every joint strong , and We can replace them whenever We may please with the people like them .
Indeed this ( Quran ) is a Reminder . So whoever desires may adopt the way to ( reach ) his Lord .
And you cannot wish anything yourselves except what Allah wills . Indeed Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
He admits whom He wills to ( the circle of ) His Mercy and He has prepared a grievous torment for the wrongdoers .
By the soft blowing pleasant breezes which blow in succession .
Then by the violent winds which blow with fierce gusts .
And by those which spread the clouds all around .
Then by those which split ( them ) apart and break them off .
Then by those which bring direction and guidance .
To accomplish the argument or to warn .
Surely the promise ( of the Last Day ) which is being given to you will be certainly fulfilled .
Then when the light of the stars will be extinguished .
And when the heavenly universe will be split open .
And when the mountains will be ( broken down to dust ) and blown off .
And when the Messengers will be brought together at the appointed time ( to bear witness to their respective communities ) .
Well , for what Day is the term ( of all the affairs ) appointed ?
For the Day of Judgment !
And who has told you what the Day of Judgment is ?
Woe ( and devastation ) to the deniers on that Day !
Did We not destroy the people ( who denied ) before ?
Then We cause the later ones also to follow them ( in destruction ) .
This is how We sort out ( the matter ) with the evildoers .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Did We not create you from ( a drop ) of detestable fluid ?
Then We placed it in a secure place ( i . e . the mothers womb ) .
Till an appointed period ( of time ) .
Then We determined time periods ( for all the stages of growth from conception to birth ) . And how excellent do We determine !
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Have We not made the earth an assembling expanse .
( That draws together ) the living ( as well as ) the dead ?
We placed on it soaring high and firm mountains and gave you sweet water to drink ( from springs of sweet fresh water ) .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
( Now ) move on to that ( torment ) which you used to deny .
Proceed towards that shadow ( of the smoke of Hell ) that forks into three columns .
A shadow which is neither cool nor protecting against the heat of fire .
Indeed that ( Hell ) throws up sparks and flames ( huge ) as a lofty palace .
( It also appears ) as if those ( sparks ) are yellow camels .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
This is a Day ( on which ) they will not be able to speak too .
Nor will they be allowed to offer any excuses .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
This is the Day of Judgment ( on which ) We will gather you and ( all ) the earlier communities .
Then if you have any scheme ( and trick to escape from the torment ) , try ( that ) against Me .
Woe ( dejection ) to the deniers on that Day !
Surely the Godfearing will be ( rejoicing ) under cool shades and amid springs .
And whatever fruits they will long for ( will be available for them ) .
( It will be said to them : ) Enjoy eating and drinking to your taste as a reward for what you used to do .
Indeed the same way do we We reward the pious .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
( O deniers of Truth ! ) Eat and enjoy yourselves for a short while . No doubt , you are the evildoers .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
And when it is said to them : Bow down ( before Allah ) , they do not bow .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Then in what Revelations after this ( Quran ) will they believe ?
What is ( it ) they are questioning about one another ?
( Are they asking ) of the Great News .
About which they differ ?
( That News is ) not at all ( deniable ) . They will soon know ( that reality ) .
( We ) once more ( assert : Dissent and denial are ) in no way ( right ) . They will come to know soon .
Have We not made the earth a place to stay for ( life ) and to earn living and deeds ?
And ( have We not ) erected mountains raised ( out of it ) ?
And ( ponder : ) We ( have ) created you in pairs ( for reproduction ) .
And We ( have ) made your sleep ( a means of bodily ) rest .
And We ( have ) made the night a covering ( by virtue of its darkness ) .
And We ( have ) made the day ( a time ) for ( earning ) livelihood .
And ( now study the spatial universe as well ) . We built above you seven strong ( firmaments ) .
And We made ( the sun a massive ) fountainhead of light and heat .
And We poured water in torrents from rain - laden clouds .
So that by means of this ( downpour ) We bring forth ( from the earth ) grain and vegetation .
And ( grow ) thick gardens .
( Observing these signs of Our Might , know that ) the Day of Judgment ( Resurrection too ) is certainly a fixed time .
The Day when the Trumpet will be blown , you will flock ( in the Holy Presence of Allah ) in droves .
And the ( layers of ) heaven shall be torn and ( owing to the rip ) they will become ( as if ) all doors .
And the mountains ( after being reduced to dust ) will be blown off ( into the atmosphere ) ; so they will be ( eliminated like ) a mirage .
Surely , Hell is a place of ambush .
( That ) is the abode of rebels .
They will abide there for recurrent , infinite periods .
They will taste in it neither coolness ( of any sort ) nor any drink .
Except boiling water and suppurated fluid oozing ( from the wounds of the inmates of Hell ) .
A compensation commensurate with ( their revolt ) .
For they had no fear of Reckoning ( on the Last Day ) in the least .
And they used to utterly deny Our Signs .
And We have preserved everything ( major or minor ) in writing .
( O disbelievers , you excelled in rebellion and disbelief in the world . ) Now taste the outcome ( of your actions ) . We shall keep increasing but the torment upon you .
Surely the Godfearing will triumph .
( For them ) there will be gardens and grapes .
And well - matched young maidens .
And overflowing cups ( of holy beverage ) .
There , these ( people ) will neither hear any foolish talk nor belie ( one another ) .
From your Lord this is the reward which is an ( amply ) sufficient bestowal ( in proportion to your works ) .
He is the Lord of ( all ) the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , the Most Kind . ( But on the Last Day the Effect and Impact of His Mighty Power and Most High Authority will be such that ) none ( from His Creation ) will dare converse with Him .
That Day Gabriel ( the Spirit of Peace and Security ) and ( all ) angels will stand in ranks , none able to speak except he whom the Most Kind Lord would already have awarded sanction ( to intercede ) and who also said the right thing , ( in keeping with the teachings of Islam , during his life of the world ) .
This is the Day of Truth . So , whoever longs may obtain an abode ( of mercy and nearness ) in the Presence of his Lord .
We have , indeed , warned you of the impending torment . On that Day , everyone will see whatever ( acts ) he has sent ahead and ( every ) disbeliever will say : Would that I were dust ( and escaped this punishment ) !
By the ( angels ) who violently snatch out ( the souls of the disbelievers from each tendon and ligament of their body ) .
And by the ( angels ) who unweave sinews ( of the believers organisms ) gently and peacefully .
And by the ( angels ) who swiftly glide ( between the heavens and the earth ) .
Then by the ( angels ) who with burst of speed sprint past others .
Then by the ( angels ) who manage different affairs well .
( When they will be commanded to devastate the system of the universe ) that day everything in motion ( in the universe ) will tremor into violent convulsion .
Chased by a succeeding convulsion .
That day hearts ( of the people ) will pound with agony and terror .
Their eyes will be downcast ( with dread and horror ) .
The disbelievers say : Shall we be reverted to the former life ?
( Shall we be given life even ) when we shall have become rotten ( hollow ) bones ?
They say : This ( return ) would then be a losing return .
Then it will be rending ( of all heavenly bodies ) asunder with single extremely horrible explosion .
Then they ( all ) will forgather suddenly in the open expanse ( for assembly ) .
Has the account of Musa ( Moses ) reached you ?
When His Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa .
( And commanded : ) Go to Pharaoh . He has become a rebel .
Then say ( to him ) : Do you wish that you should be purified ?
( And do you desire that ) I guide you to your Lord so that you may fear ( Him ) ?
Then Musa ( Moses ) showed him the Great Sign .
But he denied it and disobeyed .
Then , turning away ( from the Truth ) , he launched struggle ( in rivalry against Musa [ Moses ] ) .
So he gathered ( people ) and started calling out .
And said : I am your lord , most high .
Then Allah seized him in ( dual ) punishment of this world and the Hereafter .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great lesson of warning for him who fears ( Allah ) .
Is it you who are harder to create or ( the entire ) galactic universe that He has built ?
He raised high all the heavenly spheres ( planets , after creating them in the infinite cosmos ) , then moderated , equipoised and stabilized ( their composition , construction , functions and movements ) .
And He is the One Who blackened the night of heavenly space ( i . e . darkened the entire spatial environment like a murky night ) and emitted ( after creating ) the light of these ( planets from this space ) .
And He is the One Who , later , ( after the creation of the planet sun ) separated ( from it ) the earth , flung it with centrifugal force ( and spread its expanse to make it inhabitable ) .
He is the One Who drew water from the earth ( separately ) , and brought forth its vegetable kingdom ( from the rest of the dry regions ) .
And He is the One Who ( putting together different elements ) raised from the earth firmly fixed mountains .
( He did all this ) for the benefit of you and your livestock .
Then while ( the universe ) attains ( to its acme through evolution ) , there will befall the great all - encompassing calamity ( the Hour of Resurrection ) .
That Day man will retrospect his ( every ) effort and action .
And Hell will be made manifest to everyone who can see .
Then he who transgressed the limits .
And preferred the life of the world ( to the Hereafter ) .
Hell would truly be ( his ) abode .
But as for him who feared standing in the Presence of his Lord and forbade ( his ill - commanding ) self its appetites and lusts .
Paradise will surely be ( his ) abode .
( The disbelievers ) ask you about the Hour of Rising : When will it come to pass ?
What should be your concern in talking about ( its appointed time ) ?
Its ultimate limit is up to your Lord ( i . e . as in the beginning , only Oneness will survive in the end as well ) .
You are but a Warner to him who fears it .
So the Day when they will see it , they ( will feel as if they ) did not tarry ( in the world ) but for one evening or one morning .
A feeling of uneasiness came upon his ( holy ) face and he turned aside his ( radiant ) face .
Because a blind man approached him ( who interrupted his discourse ) .
And what do you know ? Perhaps he would be purified ( further owing to your attending to him ) .
Or would accept ( your ) advice which would provide him benefit ( more and more ) .
But the one who disregards ( Din [ Religion ) ] .
You administer greater care ( for his acceptance of Islam ) .
Whereas there is no ( burden of ) responsibility on you even if he does not adopt purification ( faith ) .
And as for him who has ( himself ) come to you exerting ( in pursuit of piousness ) .
And he fears ( his Lord ) as well .
But you are not focusing your attention on him .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Not so indeed ! These ( Verses of the Holy Quran ) are but advice .
The one who seeks may accept it ( and learn by heart ) .
( They are inscribed ) on venerable and revered pages .
Which are exalted ( and ) purified .
( Have come forth ) by the hands of emissaries ( and scribes ) .
Who are possessors of eminence ( and ) embodiments of obedience .
Ruin seize ( the cursed disbelieving ) man ! How ungrateful he is ! ( He does not honour the award of such a great blessing after receiving it . )
From what stuff has Allah created him ?
He created him from a sperm drop , then determined his measure along with that ( regarding genes and sex ) .
Then ( after structuring , developing and completing it ) eased for him the passage ( of delivery from the mothers womb ) .
Then caused him to die and ( buried him ) into a grave .
Then whenever He wills , He will raise them up ( alive again ) .
Indeed he ( the disobedient man ) did not fulfil that ( obligatory due ) which ( Allah ) had commanded him .
So man should look at his food ( and ponder ) .
Indeed We pour down water in torrents .
Then We split the earth and tear it asunder .
We then grow from it grain .
And grapes and vegetables .
And the olive and the date palm .
And thickly planted dense gardens .
And ( a variety of ) fruits and ( animals ) fodder .
As provision both for you and your livestock ( to live on ) .
So , when the Deafening Blast comes .
On that Day man will flee from his brother .
And from his mother and his father ( too ) .
And ( even ) from his wife and his children .
On that Day every person will be in such a ( dismal ) state that will make him unconcerned ( with everyone else ) .
The same Day many faces will ( be such as will ) be shining ( with light ) .
( They will be ) smiling , laughing ( and ) rejoicing .
And numerous faces there will be covered with dust that Day .
These ( faces ) will be overshadowed with darkness ( as well ) .
They are the people who are disbelievers ( and ) mischief - mongers ( evildoers ) .
When the sun will be folded up and extinguished .
And the stars will fall ( from their galaxies ) .
And when the mountains , ( after having changed into dust , ) will be set in motion ( into atmosphere ) .
And when the she - camels heavy with young will be left neglected and discarded ( i . e . no one will tend them ) .
And when ( fear - stricken ) wild beasts will be herded together .
When ( all ) oceans and rivers will be made to rise and swell .
And when souls will be united ( with their bodies ) .
And when the infant girl buried alive will be asked .
For what crime was she slain ?
And when the records of deeds will be laid open .
And when the layers of heaven will be torn asunder and moved away from their places .
And when ( the Fire of ) Hell will be burnt ablaze .
And when Paradise will be brought up close .
Everyone will come to know what he has brought forth .
So I swear by ( the heavenly spheres ) which recede ( after appearing ) .
Which revolve freely , ( then ) hide ( after appearing ) .
And by the night when its darkness tapers off .
And by the morning when its light dawns .
Indeed , this ( Quran ) is the Word ( communicated ) by a glorious and most venerable Messenger .
Who is Mighty and Strong ( in Calling to the Truth , Preaching the faith in Messengership and Spiritual Competence , and ) is held in extreme reverence and veneration ( and splendour and glory ) in the Presence of the Lord of the Throne .
Entitled to obligatory obedience ( by all the worlds because obedience to him is obedience to Allah ) and faithful to His trust ( possesses Revelation and all divine secrets of the heavens and the earth ) .
And , ( O people , ) he who blesses you with his ( holy ) companionship ( Muhammad [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] ) is not mad . ( Whatever he communicates is the Truth . )
And he has indeed seen ( the Absolute Beauty of the Lord of the Throne ) on the effulgent horizon ( of the Realm of Divinity ) .